
SRI DAKSHINAMURTY ASHTAKAM
UPADESHA GRACED BY HIS HOLINESS SRI SRI SHANKARABHARATI MAHASWAMIJI,
BASED ON THE TEXT MANASOLLASA BY SRI SURESHWARACHARYA 
(Location: Jyoti Institute of Technology, Bangalore)


Introduction: 

Our Guru Sri ShankaraBhagawadpaadaacharya  has been travelling across the country in order to grace every corner with his upadesha for enabling every human being to walk the path of righteousness i.e. sanmaarga. We attach several meanings to the word sanmarga, however the teachings of Sri ShankaraBhagawadpaadaacharya  are extremely unique, and we do not obtain this anywhere other than in the Upanishads and in the works written in accordance with them and the teachings of realized souls. By such teachings graced upon us, Sanatana Dharma was again able to hold its head high in our country as is historically known. For this, Sri ShankaraBhagawadpaadaacharya  chose the upanishads on the basis of which the prasthaana traya and several  other texts were written. Through His teachings, the meaning of the upanishads was graced to the entire society, and on the basis of the very same teachings, Sri ShankaraBhagawadpaadaacharya showed us by His own example as to how to live our lives as well, and in this manner became the greatest among those who brought transformation to our country, which is a fact that the whole world accepts today. Among such aforementioned works, one very important text is the Dakshinamurty ashtakam, in which the essence of the upanishads is extolled in 8 verses in the form of contemplations on the ultimate reality, with two additional verses related to upasana and phalashruti. By this upadesha, each and every human irrespective of race or religion, is motivated and enabled to walk the path of sanmaarga, and this is testimony to the incomparable grace of Sri ShankaraBhagawadpaadaacharya for global welfare. 
Having been graced with a human birth, we all possess the ability and independence to remove unwanted troubles and obtain the most coveted aananda i.e. infinite bliss. This is a special privilege that no other animal possesses. The upadesha for achieving the above objective is verily what is known as adhyaatma, and the Dakshinamurty ashtakam is indeed adhyaatma in the sense that it is one of the most effective and simple means for removing sorrow and obtaining bliss. 

Sri Dakshinamurty is usually thought to be Iswara, or the four handed form that is well known in scriptures (such as displaying the Jnana mudra, book, rosary and lamp etc. ). While this is applicable to saguna dhyana, the form of Dakshinamurty that we have set out to study is the nirguna form described in the Dakshinamurty upanishad as 

शेमुषी दक्षिणा प्रोक्ता सा यस्याभीक्षणे मुखं । 
दक्षिणाभिमुखः प्रोक्तः शिवः असौ ब्रह्मवादिभि।।  
	
Śemuṣī dakṣiṇā proktā sā yasyābhīkṣaṇe mukhaḥ
Dakṣiṇābhimukhaḥ proktaḥ śivaḥ asau brahmavādibhiḥ.
			
In this above verse, the word Dakshina refers to our Buddhi. This buddhi is verily the dwaara or mukha i.e. the ‘means’ to realize our nature of bliss. This bliss or aananda swarupa is nothing but Shiva i.e. the advaita tattva (non dual truth). Dakshinamurty  is therefore nothing but our jnaan swarupa (pure consiousness) or, Dakshinamurty  is one whose body is nothing but consciousness. The buddhi or knowledge of our aananda swarupa is therefore personified by the form of Dakshinamurty . Though several aspects of the form of Dakshinamurty  have been prescribed for saguna dhyana, the contemplation on our nirguna swarupa is devoid of any such form, shape, color etc. as the object of contemplation is pure bliss alone. Further, as nirguna paramaatma (the supreme being) is all-pervasive and is present in every particle of dust, blade of grass and all substances and entities, he is devoid of any limiting adjuncts of space, time or form. In the Dakshinamurty ashtakam slokas, contemplation on our aananda swarupa which is realizable via our buddhi alone has been expounded, therefore this ashtakam is indeed an effective means for saadhana. 


SLOKA 1: 
विश्वं दर्पणदृश्यमाननगरीतुल्यं निजान्तर्गतं
पश्यन्नात्मनि मायया बहिरिवोद्भूतं यथा निद्रया ।
यः साक्षात्कुरुते प्रबोधसमये स्वात्मानमेवाद्वयं
तस्मै श्रीगुरुमूर्तये नम इदं श्रीदक्षिणामूर्तये ॥१॥

Obeisance to him, who on realising that it is by Maaya that the universe which has no being of its own appears to exist like a city in a mirror, and outside of oneself in the manner of the dream-world, awakes to and shines as that non-dual effulgent Self (bliss), the resplendent Dakshnimamurty, incarnate in the glorious figure of one’s own Sri Guru. 

In the upanishads, the teachings about the highest principle are usually expounded in the form of conversations between teacher-pupil, father-son etc. In this text, the slokas contain an implied conversation between the teacher and pupil i.e. Guru-shishya samvaada. The first sloka in fact is an answer to a question asked by the shishya. The implied question here is:

Q: In the experience of the world that we see, we find existence or ‘IS-ness’ everywhere, for example we say ‘a pot IS’, ‘a person IS’ ‘a tree IS’ etc. In any place or time, even when we experience the absence of an entity, we experience IS-ness, because without a substratum it is not possible to speak of the absence of an entity. For example, when we say that ‘a pot IS NOT here’, we are still experiencing the existence of the locus of absence of the pot i.e. we say ‘a pot IS NOT here on the ground’, in which case we experience the IS-ness of the ground. 
Secondly, everywhere in the world we experience the ‘shine’ (prakaasha) or appearance of various entities. The question here is, is the existence and shine that is found everywhere, of  objects themselves, or of something else? 
This doubt stems from the fact that none of the objects experienced are capable of revealing their existence by themselves (due to their inertness), and when their existence alone is not revealed by them, it is impossible to fathom the revelation of their shine by themselves as well. 
Nonetheless, our experience is of the form ‘I see this’ ‘I hear this’ etc. Since the inert objects themselves do not reveal their own existence and appearance ( shine), wherefrom do they manifest? 

Here we must understand that the primary purpose of this question is to lead one to true bliss, to true tranquility and total absence of sorrow, and indeed such inquiry is essential for meeting this objective. 
The apparent contradiction between our experience of the existence and shine of objects, and their intrinsic inability to reveal themselves, is resolved in the first verse as follows. 


(Fig. world as an appearance in a mirror)


Answer in the first verse: 
This very deep and subtle question is answered by means of two simple examples as follows. 
First, the existence i.e satta of the whole world is explained via the following analogy- consider a mirror in which the reflection of a city is seen by us. The whole world is like such a reflection of a city in a mirror. In this example it is clear that the reflected image does not exist independent of the object that is reflected i.e. its existence is borrowed from the object. Similarly, the apparent world borrows its existence from a certain entity which is the primary cause of the existence and appearance of the cosmos. In the upanishads, another oft-quoted example to explain this concept is that of the rope and snake. Consider a person who sees a rope on a dim lit street, and mistakes it for a snake. Here it is clear that the existence of the rope is verily the cause for the apparent existence and appearance of the snake. Though in reality there can never actually exist a snake within a rope, the snake is ‘experienced’ by the person upon which he experiences fear and runs away. In the same manner, though we experience several objects in the world, like the apparent reflection and illusory snake, they do not intrinsically exist, but the existence of the true substratum is mistaken for their existence. 

Now the question arises as to where the true existence lies. The verse says that the true existence of the whole world is verily within us, and has pervaded all that is outside i.e. that the whole world of experience exists within us and appears as though outside. In the case of the mirror it was clear that the object that is in front, appears as though it is within the illusory depth in the mirror. From this example however, how can we understand the apparent external existence and appearance of the world as truly existing within us? 
To answer this question, a second example is provided in the verse based on the dream experience. In the case of a dream, it is well known that none of us realize or ‘awaken’ to the truth that the whole dream world has no external existence but occurs within us while we sleep. Moreover it is only due to the illusory notion of external existence that we experience fear and joy from dream entities. The dream world,  though imagined within, appears as though outside due to the illusory power of sleep. The waking world in a similar way appears outside us because we are currently ‘asleep’ due to ignorance, and are experiencing the dream-like cosmos. When we apply the above means of discriminative thinking we realize that the whole cosmos is verily imagined within us, with no intrinsic external existence. 
The verse further says “yah saakshaat kurute prabodha samaye svaatmaanam eva advayam..” to explain the true reality from which the world borrows its existence as follows. In the dream, the whole world of external experience of horses, elephants etc. are truly not there, and the only true object of existence in the dream parlance is the dreamer alone, who is without a second. In the waking state as well, all that truly exists is the Self alone, and just as this truth is realized in the case of the dream on awakening, the truth of the Non-Dual existence of the Self (whose form is pure bliss), is realized on awakening by the knowledge that is compassionately graced upon us by Dakshinamurty  who is none other than our own Sri Guru, who resides within us as the truly existing reality. It is important to understand that such unique and special compassionate grace  i.e. Guru-Kripaa can be obtained by us only if we sincerely contemplate on the tattva (principle) explained in the verses of Dakshinamurty ashtakam. via proper viveka (discrimination). On obtaining this grace we indeed merge into the tattva itself, and truly realize that the whole world of experience is indeed never outside of our Self, but is imagined within us (i.e. the kalpana of the world is done within). Moreover, this world is not distinct from us at all, and in reality the one Self i.e. our swarupa of non-dual bliss or chaitanya verily appears as this world. 

Another aspect discussed in the verse is that, the appearance of the dream world (just as in the waking state) warrants a source of illumination by which the dream is seen. What is this light? It is clear that other than the Self nothing else exists during the dream. Therefore it is evident that it is by the light of the Self alone that the dream world is illumined. Just as this is realized on awakening from the dream, in the waking world too, the true nature of the Self as being the universal illuminator and the only true existence is realized when one awakens by the grace obtained by taking refuge in Dakshinamurty  i.e our jnaana swarupa or consciousness, who is our Sri Guru. The last line of the verse (‘Tasmai sri guru murtaye nama idam Sri Dakshinamurtaye’) talks about taking refuge in this jnaan swarupa i.e the Self which is the basis for existence and appearance of the world. 

This sloka and the others in Dakshinamurty ashtakam may be considered as simple formulae such as (a+b)^2=a^2+b^2+2ab. Though such mathematical formulae are not fully understood by us on first encountering them, their true scope and magnitude can be understood only when we plug in different values for a and b and experiment with the formula. Similarly, the true expansive scope and real meaning of the first verse can be fully understood by us only when we experiment with this verse and meditate on it by plugging in various instances of our day to day experiences, upon which the grace of Sri Guru is obtained in the form of ultimate realization. 

This Dakshinamurty ashtakam stotra may be considered as a stuti or adulation of our chaitanya swarupa i.e. Sri Guru. By offering this stotra by means of sincere contemplation and meditation, Dakshinamurty  will indeed be pleased with our efforts and bless our buddhi with the special shakti for Self realization. 

Sri Sureshwaraacharya who was a great scholar, recommended by his teacher to Sri ShankaraBhagawadpaadaacharya as the foremost pupil, has written a commentary on Dakshinamurty ashtakam called manasollasa. In that, an example to explain the term ‘svaatmaanam eva advayam’  is provided in the following sloka. 
भुक्तं यथान्नं कुक्षिस्थं स्वात्मत्वेनैव पश्यति । 
पूर्णाहन्ता कबलितं विश्वं योगीश्वरस्तथा।। 

(Just as food once eaten and consumed within the stomach is seen to be the self itself, the yogi consumes the whole world within him in the form of complete I-ness). 

Before eating  food, rice, gravy etc. are all separate and exist outside us. However, on consumption (or experiencing) of the food, it verily merges into us and all its separate parts become the self. Similarly, the whole world of variegated experience upon realization through jnaana graced by the Sri Guru, is realized to be nondual, homogenous and non-different from Dakshinamurty  i.e. our Swarupa. 

(Question by audience): 

Q: We have seen that sometimes we experience both good and bad dreams and  events in the dreams can shape our reality. How can this be understood in light of the first verse?
A:  Bad, fearful or pleasing dreams can be viewed by an unperturbed mind through an unbiased perspective only if we understand the tattva or reality of dreams. In terms of the the phala or fruit of good and bad dreams, it applies only to those who do not understand the reality of dreams and mistakenly consider them to be truly real. Having realized the tattva of dreams as per the upanishads, the only phala will be aananda. 
For such a realized one, i.e. a jnaani, dreams in fact do not even occur and even if they do for some reason, the tattva that he has realized will uplift him and ensure that he is always established in his state of infinite bliss, so also in the waking state. This may be understood by the following example. As children, we were instructed never to touch jackfruit lest our hands become smeared with the sticky substance that oozes out of the fruit, which was very difficult to wash off later. However, if one smears oil before touching the jackfruit, this substance will not stick to the hand at all. Similarly, a jnaani has apriori ‘smeared’ himself with the saakshaatkaara (realization) of the tattva of his swarupa, and of dreams and waking realities, and hence is not at all affected by the joys or sorrows of the waking world though he interacts in it, and is never perturbed from his state of infinite bliss. 

Q: We only dream of things that we have seen or thought about earlier. Then, how do we say that dream is aatman (Self)?   
A: We do not say that the dream is aatman, rather we focus on the one who is seeing or illuminating the dream. In the dream, our eye is non functional nor are the rest of the senses, nor is there any other source of illumination. Though the mind is functioning, since it is inert it is incapable of illumining the dream world. The seer of the dream therefore is none other than our witness Self i.e. saakshi. 

Q: What is the saakshi for aatman? What is the aadhara (substratum) for aatman?
A: For the existence of aatman, the aadhara or saakshi is our Self only. We all say “I exist”. This “I” is indeed not the body, sense or mind as it is clear from our expression “My body, my senses, my mind” etc. which clearly establishes the fact that the Self is distinct from the body-mind complex, just as when we say “my Horse, my House” the Self is distinct from the house or horse. This distinct Self is none other than aatman or saakshi as only if this Self exists, can saakshi-the witness, as well. Further the body, mind, etc. are all inert and they function only by power of our chaitanya swarupa. 





















Sloka 2: 
बीजस्याऽन्तरिवाङ्कुरो जगदिदं प्राङ्गनिर्विकल्पं पुनः
मायाकल्पितदेशकालकलना वैचित्र्यचित्रीकृतम् ।
मायावीव विजृम्भयत्यपि महायोगीव यः स्वेच्छया
तस्मै श्रीगुरुमूर्तये नम इदं श्रीदक्षिणामूर्तये ॥२॥

Obeisance to Him, in whom the universe was undifferentiated prior to projection like the sprout latent in a seed, and who by His will made it picturesque in all its variety in respect of space, time etc., conjured up by His Maaya like a magician or a mighty yogin, to that resplendent Dakshinamurty, incarnate in the glorious figure of one’s own Sri Guru. 

Though in the first sloka the advaita tattva i.e. the nondual truth of the Self has already been expounded, the student who is extremely thirsty for his ananda swarupa is not yet satiated, and thereby questions the Sri Guru further. It is highly imperative that we note that such perseverent questioning accompanied by sincere contemplative effort is an essential quality of a disciple who is determined to reach his goal of obtaining His most wanted bliss and truly remove all sorrow. 


Here in the second verse, the implied question is explained as follows. 
Q: It was said in the first verse that the whole world is non different from aatman (i.e. Dakshinamurty  or jnaana swarupa). However, for us to accept this, it needs to be justified as to how Dakshinamurty  alone is the kaarana (cause) for the world, just as silver alone is the cause for silver ornaments and not mud or wood. In what way then, is Dakshinamurty  the cause by which the world exists or appears?



A: We can understand paramaatma or aananda as the cause or substratum of the world via the following example. Consider a banyan seed which sprouts and turns into a huge tree variegated by flowers, fruits, leaves, branches etc. The seed therefore is the substratum or cause of the tree, though the tree with its variegations are totally absent in the seed. Since the seed sprouts as the tree, one is forced to accept that the whole tree in all its aspects are contained in the seed in a subtle form which later manifests in its gross external form. Without this subtle and unmanifested existence in the seed, it is indeed impossible for the tree to sprout. Similarly, the whole cosmos existed in paramaatma (or aananda) in a subtle, seed-like form prior to manifestation (i.e. srishti). We must note that this external manifestation is due to the ‘sleep’ of ignorance. Therefore, paramaatma can indeed be conceived of as the cause of the cosmos, just as the seed. 


(Fig. Cosmic tree from the seed of paramatma)
The seed-like form may be understood as follows. Prior to creation, the whole world existed in a subtle,  nirvikalpa form i.e. bereft of names and forms, just as the tree existed in a nirvikalpa form in the seed. 

In the above example, a doubt that can arise is as follows. 
Q: Just as from the seed, the tree actually emerges, does the world actually emerge from paramaatma?Moreover, did it really exist prior to manifestation? 
A: In order to resolve this doubt, a second example is provided in the verse as follows. Consider a magician who manifests various objects from his props. It is clear that the objects do not exist in reality at all, but appear through his magic alone. Moreover, the magician is also able to produce one object from another (such as currency from a simple piece of paper) purely by his magic power. The cause of all these manifestations is the magician alone who makes them appear via his magic power or maayaa, though they do not exist in reality. Similarly, the whole world, by the power or maayaa shakti of paramatma-the cosmic magician, manifests in its wonderful form, variegated by space, time and form. It is by this maayaa that the objects of the world appear manifold and with mutual relations (sambandha). In reality however, it is none other than paramatma or aananda who is the sole cause of the cosmos. 

Q: Though via the second example we may rule out the true manifestation or true apriori existence of the world, a further doubt remains. In case of the magician, a certain prop or substance is utilized e.g. a piece of paper to produce illusory currency etc. In case of paramatma who is without any second entity, what is such a pre-existing substance or prop using which he performs his maayaa? 

A: To answer this, a third example is provided by the verse. Consider a maha yogi who purely by his yogic powers can manifest a whole world. For example, the sage Vishwamitra manifested a second heaven for one of his pupils to enjoy. Such yogic manifestation does not depend on any causal substance, but occurs purely by yogic power itself. 
In this way, paramatma or aananda manifests himself as the world, without any second entity or substance, by his own shakti. 

Q: A further question remains now as to why paramatma proceeded to create the world? What  or who prompted his will? 

The underlying reason for asking this question is that the world as we know, is filled with sorrow and an unending chain of difficulties, amidst which few joys that occur go mostly unnoticed. If the world was blissful then such a doubt may perhaps not have occurred. However, we are  indignant as to why on earth paramatma, who is ananda, created this weird world? 

A: The answer to this occurs in the verse via the word ‘Swecchyayaa’ i.e. that paramatma created the world by his own truly-free will. The upanishads say that paramatma ‘willed’ to manifest himself via his maayaa shakti as this world which is like an illusory city in a mirror. To reinforce this idea and to truly take us to our aananda swarupa, the only means just as in the first verse, is to take refuge in Dakshinamurty  -our Sri Guru. 

Questions from audience: 

Q: Just as a silver caused ornament can not be other than silver, then how can paramatma who is purely ananda, be the cause of the world which is mostly filled with sorrow? 

A: Yes, paramatma is indeed aananda only, and in reality, the true nature of the world is also aananda. Consider this example- in dreams, we experience both joys and sorrows. Why can't the seer or manifester of the dream i.e. we, choose to see only joyous dreams? The occurrence of dreams is not random and must follow some cause. Paramatma who is aananda indeed created the world by his will, however his maayaa shakti is based on the previously performed karma by various beings or Jivas. The sorrow in this illusory world thereby is encoded by previously performed wrong deeds in the very same illusory world, just as impressions of previously performed acts can cause new dreams of a similar nature. The impressions that are the basis of this world are gathered from karma performed not only in this birth but several previous births as well. This is evidenced from the fact that a person who is born blind can have dreams of form such as of a person wearing saffron cloth etc. 
Despite all this, though we experience sorrow in the world, its real nature is purely bliss, nothing else. For example, in case of a bad dream, the seer is peacefully sleeping. This is further clear from the fact that after dreaming, everyone, including animals like ants, experience pure bliss in deep sleep (sushupti). A person may be severely diseased with cancer. However in deep sleep all these pains simply vanish. This proves that our true nature is pure bliss, however, due to lack of realization, we do not experience it. It is indeed in order to realize the same that we have resolved to contemplate on Dakshinamurty ashtakam. 

Q: If everything is predetermined, what is then the role of free will or human effort?

A: The tendency to perform future action is termed as ‘vasana’ which arises from past samskaaras i.e. impressions gathered via performing karma. The esteemed JagadGuru of Sringeri, Sri Sri Chandrashekhara Bharati Mahaswamiji once said “If you say that the future is determined by past actions,  what then stops you  from performing good acts now in order to secure good future prospects? Who asked you to perform bad acts previously? If you indeed perform good acts as prescribed by the upanishads, indeed a wonderful future may be secured”.

It is indeed us who determine our own future. Even scientists today accept this. In the human brain, there are countlessly many neurons. One important structural portion of the brain is the pre-frontal cortex (PCF) which governs all decision making  in our life. Scientists today claim that this PFC may be reprogrammed via our efforts such as stotra paaraayana, dhyana, pranayama etc. By developing our PFC, one may create a positive future secured via good decision making. Among such methods to develop the PFC, another important and very effective one is teaching others the tattva of the upanishads. 
We therefore must simply not squander this precious human birth, but spend time even in the midst of our profession, to follow the upanishads. 



























Sloka 3:
यस्यैव स्फुरणं सदात्मकमसत्कल्पार्थकं भासते
साक्षात्तत्त्वमसीति वेदवचसा यो बोधयत्याश्रितान् ।
यत्साक्षात्करणाद्भवेन्न पुनरावृत्तिर्भवाम्भोनिधौ
तस्मै श्रीगुरुमूर्तये नम इदं श्रीदक्षिणामूर्तये ॥३॥
Obeisance to Him whose radiance alone, that is the Reality, renders manifest, things which by themselves are non-entities, who directly enlightens those who take refuge in Him, with the world of the veda- ‘Tat Tvam Asi’-on direct realization of which there will never be return again to the ocean of samsaara, to that resplendent Dakshinamurty, incarnate in the glorious form of one’s own Sri Guru. 

Q: What is the means by which direct realization of our Self i.e. our aananda swarupa is possible? 
A: In the first verse, from the mirror and dream example what was clarified is our true swarupa i.e. the ‘TVAM’ padartha in the mahaavaakya ‘Tat Tvam Asi’ (That Thou Art). 
(This clarification was achieved in the following manner. Initially one mistakes oneself to be a limited entity within a vast world of names and forms. By the first verse contemplation on the mirror and dream analogies, one realizes one’s expansive and cosmic nature and the fact that the whole world is pervaded by the Self. By this, one’s wrong notions of delimitation of the self are removed. On further contemplation on the rest of the verse, one realizes that the variegated world, just as in a dream, is not truly present in us, and that our true swarupa is that of non-dual existence and of the form of pure illumination, and other than us, none exist and it is our existence and shine that is borrowed by the illusory world). 

In the second verse, the swarupa of paramatma or ‘TAT’ in the mahaavakya ‘Tat Tvam Asi’ is clarified by the 3 examples. The question now is as to whether this TAT i.e. paramatma and TVAM i.e. the Self are the same or distinct? Indeed, as long as one thinks that he is distinct from TAT or aananda, darkness and sorrow are inescapable. In reality, TAT=TVAM i.e. aikya or one-ness exists. It is only when one realizes this that one immediately realizes His infinite ananda swarupa and completely overcomes all sorrow. This contemplation of one-ness is explained as follows. 
We all apply several efforts in the day to be happy, but experience an admixture of joys and sorrows in the waking and dream state. In deep sleep however, we experience pure bliss bereft of even a shade of sorrow. The primary reason is that, in waking and dream states, one assumes a secondary existence apart from the Self. In deep sleep however, no such notions exist. In fact, the thought “I am sleeping blissfully” also does not occur at that time, and thereby one is immersed in pure bliss. When there is the appearance of a second entity or aananda different from us, sorrow is inescapable. The veda says ‘TAT TVAM ASI” i.e. “YOU ARE ANANDA/PARAMAATMA”.

Prior to realization, one feels that one is limited, has little knowledge, little power, little bliss and mostly difficulties etc. On the other hand, quite contrarily, paramaatma is infinite, omniscient, omnipotent and is infinite bliss bereft of sorrow. When graced with knowledge by Sri Guru, one realizes that the Self and Paramaatma are one and the same, and that both have the same swarupa of pure consciousness (i.e. chetana swarupa). Prior to realization we associate ourselves with limiting adjuncts such as the body, mind etc. due to which our intellect would exclaim that there is no way that we who are limited can be paramaatma who is of such greatness. On refining the intellect via contemplations enjoined in these verses, one understands that one’s true nature is pure consciousness which is without the adjuncts of the body and mind, and that paramaatma’s true nature is pure existence, consciousness and bliss (sat-chit-ananda), without the qualifying adjuncts of being the creator and ruler of the cosmos etc.,  and that the swarupa of paramatma is verily one’s own swarupa. 
When one truly realizes this truth at an experiential level, one is immersed in pure, infinite bliss, just as in the deep sleep state. Upon such experience, all sorrows are removed and moreover, one realizes one's full potential for perfection in all spheres of activity as one has attained one’s own true jnaan swarupa. This has indeed been realized by several jnaanis who lived to evidence the same. 

The sphurana or manifestation of the objects of the cosmos occurs via the sat vastu or truly existing entity i.e. the Self, which manifests itself as the several non-entities of experience. Further, the really existing aatman appears as though non-existing as well. This is caused by maayaa. In order to alleviate this illusion, the veda prescribes the method of pratyabhijna, explained as follows. In our daily lives we encounter situations where a previously known entity or person is recognized much later as “he himself is that person”. An example is when a childhood friend travels abroad for many years after which his entire body, apparel, and appearance has drastically changed. Upon seeing the same person return, though initially unrecognized, as soon as past memory flashes, he is immediately recognized to be the very same old childhood friend. In this realization, we cast aside the appearance, apparel, and mannerisms and all such qualifying adjuncts of both the presently appearing person and the person from memory long past, and what remains in both instances is the very same individual. This process of recognizing two entities which are apriori distinctly understood due to distinct qualifying adjuncts, as the very same single entity, by removing both sets of qualifying adjuncts, is termed as pratyabjijna or ‘recognition’ by the veda. 
By this process of pratyabhijna, all illusory qualifying adjuncts of both the Self and Paramatma such as body, mind, functioning etc. are removed and what remains in both instances is pure sat-chit-aananda. 
The verse says ‘saakshaat tat tvam asi iti veda vachasa yo bodhayati aashritaan’ i.e. for those who take refuge in Sri Guru, pleading to be uplifted from samsara, this ‘bodha’ or realization is blessed via the sacred Sri Guru Upadesha as “Why do you worry? You are indeed the aananda swarupa! Cast aside your worries, I will show you the way!”. 

In this manner, the disciple is uplifted, and realizes his own sat-chit-aananda swarupa, and never again returns to sorrow or the cycle of rebirth via entering another womb. He is forever freed from the deadly ocean of samsara. Here, the word ‘samsaara’ or ‘bhava’ in the sloka does not refer just to family etc. as the word is commonly understood, rather it refers to the notion of ‘I’ and ‘Mine’ or ‘My object of experience’. These are called ‘kartrtva’  and ‘bhoktrtva’. As long as the notions of ‘I’ or ‘mine’ persist, even renunciate monks experience the sorrow of samsaara, and only when these notions disappear, does samsaara. 

Our Sri Guru, therefore, out of his infinite compassion, instructs the disciple who has taken refuge in him, to cast aside all the limiting adjuncts and realize that both the Self and Paramatma are of the swarupa of ‘chit’ or pure consciousness, and in this way is taken across samsara. This profound and blissful realization is made possible purely by the compassionate grace of Sri Guru i.e. Dakshinamurty , whom we take refuge in, via this verse. 

Q: It was said that the existence of paramatma or the Self was seen in objects which are non entities, and to illustrate this, the mirror analogy was given in the first verse. Here the following doubt remains. If the world is like a reflection in a mirror, like a face, then like the object that is reflected, the truly existing entity must also possess a form that is capable of being reflected. Our swarupa or paramaatma however, is formless (amurta) and is even more subtle than aakasha or space, which itself is incapable of being reflected. Surely the Self or paramaatma therefore can not be reflected as this world, owing to the absence of any form, color etc. Therefore we can not establish paramaatma or the Self as sarva satta sphurana rupa brahma (self effulgent substratum of all). 

A: The doubt can be resolved as follows. Consider a sea shell seen in daylight that is mistaken for a piece of silver. When we approach the object, we realize it to be shell and not silver which can be traded. When ‘seeing’ the silver, what is really seen is the shell, assumed to be silver due to its shining property. Similarly, the self effulgent paramaatma itself is merely imagined as the world of a different nature. Here, ‘reflectability’ or ‘form’ is not the criterion for manifestation, but simply the self-effulgent nature of paramaatma. 
Another example is the appearance of bubbles, waves, foam etc. in water. Though we use the word ‘waves’ etc., they are indeed non different from water. It is water itself which is merely called ‘waves’ etc. In this way, paramaatma i.e. or pure consciousness itself, which is of the nature of bliss, is seen as this variegated world and called by various names such as ‘pot’ ‘tree’ etc. and just as waves and bubbles can not exist without water, the world can not exist or shine without paramaatma. 

Further, the apparent difference between the Self i.e. Jivaatma and Paramaatma, is due to the illusory qualifying adjuncts (upaadhis)  of the body, mind, prana, senses etc. When one enters deep sleep, these upaadhis vanish and one is merged in paramaatma and exists as pure bliss.
The notion of an upaadhi is clarified as follows. Consider a pure transparent crystal placed near a red flower. The hue of the flower is reflected in the crystal and it appears as though the transparent crystal has turned red, though in reality it remains unchanged. Similarly, the notion of Jivaatma for the Self is due to the borrowed ‘hue’ of the upaadhis of the body, mind etc. Just as the crystal never deviated from its transparent form, we in reality, have never deviated from our aananda swarupa. In order to realize this, one needs to apply the process of pratyabhijna by removing all qualifying adjuncts of the Self and aananda i.e. paramaatma via discriminative knowledge or viveka that is graced by Sri Guru. 

Sri Sureshwaraacharya says in the manasollasa:

देहेन्द्रिय मनोबुद्धिप्राणाहन्कारसंहातौ। 
आत्मा संकलनादज्ञैः आत्मत्वं प्रतिपाद्यते।।  
(Due to the association of the body, senses, mind, intellect, praana and ahankaara with the Self, Selfhood is attributed to them by the ignorant)

The ignorant (or non discriminating) people assume the aatma to be the body, mind etc.  as in the following example. If an iron ball is placed in fire, it glows red like fire. We use the term ‘ball of fire’ though fire itself can not exist as a ball. Further, the iron is incapable of glowing, but we say glowing iron, glowing coal due to its contact with fire. In the same way, we say that the body and mind possess Self-hood. 

In the veda, the Self is said to be enclosed in 5 sheaths (pancha kosha) i.e the gross body, prana, mind, intellect and aanandamaya kosha. One can separate the self from these associations by clearly recognizing that the sheaths are visible as “my body” “my prana”etc., and therefore can never be me. 

The manasollasa further says: 
एवं प्रकाशरॊपत्व परिज्ञाने दृढी कृते। 
पुनरावृत्ति रहितं कैवल्यं पदमश्नुते।। 

(Once the praakasha swarupa of the Self is known and the knowledge is firmly retained, one never again returns to samsara and enjoys the state of kaivalya)

He who separates the Self which is pure sat-chit-aananda from all the aforementioned limiting adjuncts, enjoys the bliss of kaivalya i.e. his kevala aananda swarupa. 

The manasollasa  also says:
सकृत प्रसक्त मात्रे अपि सर्वात्मत्वे  दृढी कृते। 
सर्व पाप विनिर्मुक्तः शिवलोके महीयते ।। 

I.e., even if one ‘hears’ about the contemplations in the verses of Dakshinamurty ashtakam even ONCE, then all his sins which are obstacles to bliss will be removed, and he will enjoy the bliss of shivaloka i.e. the realm of infinite aananda. 

Question from audience: 

Q: It was said that the good deeds of this birth can help in securing a good future birth, however that birth too will contain the notion of ‘aham’ or ‘I’. What deed can enable ultimate realization which is beyond the notion of ‘aham’?
A: Indeed if one performs good deeds one’s future birth is guaranteed to be joyous as is said in the BhagawadGita. However, if one puts in the special effort to remove the notion of ‘aham’ via contemplation in Dakshinamurty ashtakam, then the poorna anugraha or complete grace of Sri Guru is obtained, and liberation is possible. 








































Sloka 4: 
नानाच्छिद्रघटोदरस्थितमहादीपप्रभा भास्वरं
ज्ञानं यस्य तु चक्षुरादिकरणद्वारा वहिः स्पन्दते ।
जानामीति तमेव भान्तमनुभात्येतत्समस्तं जगत्
तस्मै श्रीगुरुमूर्तये नम इदं श्रीदक्षिणामूर्तये ॥४॥
Obeisance to Him, whose consciousness flows outwards through sense organs such as the eye, like the light of the mighty lamp placed in the bosom of a manyholed jar, and thus this whole universe shines after Him alone who shines in the consciousness ‘I know’, to that resplendent Dakshinamurty, incarnate in the glorious figure of one’s own Sri Guru.

Q: Paramaatma is a very subtle entity. Even after much enquiry, how do we say that paramaatma who is pure existence and pure consciousness is truly my own swarupa?Though different examples were given, how do we actually realize this within ourselves?

A: For even ordinary people to realize this via their intellect, a method has been proposed via a simple example. Direct realization beyond mere intellectual understanding too is possible, provided that one walks the path as instructed by the upanishads. Just as, when a person is to be guided to an unknown destination, a path is shown. It is only when the person actually walks the path that he can approach the destination and not otherwise. Similarly, to realize paramaatma, a path has been shown and if one walks this path and systematically contemplates according to it, direct experience begins to dawn. Moreover, when the path to an unknown destination is shown, certain salient landmarks are indicated on the way such as a tree, rock, hill etc. which when encountered by the traveller, enables conviction of being on the right path and moving closer to the destination. On the path of adhyaathma (here the word adhyaatma maarga indicates that which is assumed to be totally unrelated to us as being related exclusively to us), this verse shows one such path of enquiry. Though this is well known, we have not as of yet applied the context of the example in the prescribed manner. By following the example and accordingly contemplating and meditating on it, one can indeed attain the desired experience of the tattva. The example is as follows: 

Consider a pot placed in a dark room with no illumination, with many holes in which a powerful light source is enclosed. When any person is brought to the place where the pot is kept and asked as to what is in the pot, he would say that there is a light source within. When asked as to how he determined so even though the light being enclosed on all sides can not be seen, he says that it is clear that the pot or the holes by themselves can not emit any light as they are inert, thereby, from the fact that the holes are emitting light one can deduce that there must be a light source within the pot. This example, though simple enough to be understood by a child, illustrates a profound truth. The deduction of the light source within may now be applied to identify and distinguish our chaitanya swarupa as follows. In this example the pot is analogous to the body and the holes are analogous to various indriyas  or sense organs. The light emitted 

(Fig. pot with light within=body, holes=senses,light from holes=functioning of senses to ‘know’)

by the various holes in the pot are analogous to the functioning of various organs such as the eyes, seeing ears, hearing etc. as it is through these ‘holes’ that we obtain knowledge. Next, just as the incapacity of the pot and holes to emit light enabled the deduction of the light within, one may similarly deduce that since the eyes, ears etc. owing to their inertness, are incapable of producing knowledge of sight, sound etc., there must indeed exist a chit shakti within that enables the organs to function. Another example is, if one is asked whether there is electric current in a circuit? He would answer affirmatively owing to the fact that various appliances are functioning. In this manner when asked about the saakshi or our consciousness, one can deduce its existence from the fact that a chit-shakti or chetana vastu that is distinct from the inherently inert organs must indeed exist within us, to impel their functioning. During the time of Sri ShankaraBhagawadpaadaacharya , atheism had taken over our country to a large extent. In such circumstances, by using such easily comprehensible examples, Sri ShankaraBhagawadpaadaacharya  conveyed the highest upanishadic teachings. This shows the greatness of Sri ShankaraBhagawadpaadaacharya . Indeed even an absolute atheist who denies God’s existence can never deny his own  existence. Further, it is impossible to deny the existence of one’s inner consciousness which is distinct from the body, organs etc. due to aforementioned reasons. Though the atheist may try to refute several other facts in the vedas, in this matter he is forced to accept our stance. Sri ShankaraBhagawadpaadaacharya  has graced even the common man with such profound wisdom, due to which atheism in this country has significantly reduced as compared to earlier times. 

In the above example, the eyes, ears etc. produce knowledge by bringing about the external manifestation (spanda) of the inner consciousness in the form of seeing, hearing etc. as the verse says ‘chakshuraadi karana dvaara bahih spandate’.  One may be further convinced about the existence of this inner consciousness by considering the example of the corpse of a person who has just passed on. Though the sense organs are perfectly intact along with the body, they fail to function because consciousness has retracted its shakti from the body, rendering the organs dysfunctional. On the contrary, since our senses are functioning perfectly, one can indeed deduce that there must exist consciousness within us that is surely distinct from the body and senses, and by whose shakti they function. 

Though the above contemplation reinforces the conviction about the existence of inner consciousness, in order to take us towards our aananda swarupa, further contemplation is necessary. The verse therefore says ‘jaanaami iti tameva bhantam anubhaati etat samastam jagat’ which is explained as follows. We often use words such as ‘glowing firewood’ and ‘hot water’, though it is well known that wood can not glow or that water which is cool by nature can not produce heat. However, due to contact with fire, its heat and light are manifested in water and wood. Similarly, our buddhi is called as the ‘knower’ as it is via buddhi that we obtain knowledge. Though owing to its insentiency the buddhi is incapable of producing knowledge by itself, due to its close proximity with our jnaana swarupa and due to its very pure nature, jnaana is easily manifested in the buddhi. In this way, due to the sparsha or contact with chaitanya, the buddhi though inert can function to produce knowledge. In reality, the property of ‘knowing’ belongs to chaitanya or jnaana swarupa or pure consciousness only. The usage ‘I know’ is therefore due to the identification of the buddhi with chaitanya due manifestation of the latter in the former. The word ‘anubhaati’ in the verse indicates that the buddhi ‘knows’ following chaitanya, just as the wood glows following fire. In this way, the appearance of the whole world is comprehended via inner consciousness only. 

We must keep in mind that such simple yet profound examples can not be found anywhere other than in our vedas or scriptures. Indeed, it is certainly true that there can not be two such shaktis (or different ones in different bodies) nor can there be two such aanandas or consciousnesses, as indeed it is only one. Therefore consciousness that is within oneself is the very same that exists in everybody. 
(The logical process to deduce this fact is that, just as within my body, even though the eyes see, ear hears mind thinks etc. we do not associate different knowers with the eyes ears and mind, and consider that there is a single knower i.e. myself, similarly there is no logical basis upon which we may associate a different knower with another set of organs and mind in another body, further as regards to aananda, though the object of bliss may be different in different occasions, bliss by itself is one and the same, and the nature of both bliss and the knower is pure consciousness). 

Such a sarva-aatma bhaava is extremely profound and is the hallmark of our scriptural heritage. In order to establish oneself in one’s aananda swarupa, it is not only necessary to identify ones inner aananda swarupa or shakti by which we function, but it is also necessary to realize that it is the same aananda swarupa that is everywhere, that is in everyone, that is in everything and that IS everything! 
The contemplation of our aananda swarupa in this manner is indeed the real ‘dakshina’ in Dakshniamurty i.e. knowledge. The pictorial form with the four hands etc. is only a representation of this knowledge of bliss, just as a blueprint on a sheet of paper represents an actual beautiful house. 

(In light of the fourth verse, the upaasya murti may be utilized to realize this inner chidaananda swarupa that it represents as follows. First, we may begin with meditating on the visual form of Dakshinamurty. Then, once the image is stable in the mind without distractions, one may turn one's attention to that ‘light’ by which one is seeing the image, or the ‘seer’ of the image, and by this process one is lead to one's own inner consciousness that illumines the whole cosmos i.e. one’s saakshi or aananda swarupa. )
The fourth verse in this way provides a profound yet simple example to reinforce the conviction about our aatma swarupa that was expounded in the first three verses. Moreover the sarva aatma bhaava brought out here that one's inner consciousness or Self is the very same in all beings, certainly brings about profound transformation in one's character. All inferior feelings such as ‘me’, ‘mine’, ‘not mine’ , ‘friend’ , ‘foe’ etc. which are impossible to shake off even by the four faced creator Brahma himself, can be easily overcome by the aforementioned contemplation. Indeed, the creator has given up on us after creating this cosmos, in despair, and in order to transform our character, Dakshinamurty himself must appear, which he has done so in the form of contemplations taught in these verses. Indeed, everyone is encouraged to actually try out these contemplations doing which there would certainly be tangible transformation in one’s intellect which would enable perfection in all spheres of activity. 



























Questions by audience:
 
Q:  In the mother’s womb is the aatma of the child the same as that of the mother?
A: From the first verse, this can be easily answered by you. Indeed, aatma is only one as it is non dual. Next, though there may be countlessly many pots that enclose respective spaces within themselves, space itself is one and unbroken. Similarly, though enclosing bodies are different, aatma or chaitanya is one and universal. 

Q: What about paapa and punya (sins and merits)? Are they the same for all aatmas?
A: Paapa and punya are not attached to the self, but only to the mind. We suffer due to the admixture of chaitanya with mind. The contemplation in these verses is to absolve us from such association. Just as a mathematical formula can not be easily understood when initially encountered, and may frustrate us to the point of wanting to give up studying mathematics, it can be easily understood in its full scope when applied repeatedly to several numerical examples. Similarly the concepts taught in these verses may be fully understood only when repeatedly applied to examples in our lives. Such sincere effort is imperative to be eligible for the grace of Sri Guru. 

Q: We have learnt that for the existence and functioning of a living body in the waking state, inner consciousness or chit-shakti is indispensable. In deep sleep however, what would be the state of this consciousness?
A: You yourself can say clearly as to what the state of consciousness was in deep sleep, once you wake up. Your face infact will verily indicate the same. One who has had good sleep will wake up with a pleased countenance, but will wake up with an aghast face if sleep is disturbed. Why? During sleep, we merge into the  aatma or aananda swarupa and therefore its bubbling trace can be felt in each and every part of the body after awakening. The contact with our aananda swarupa is what is deep sleep. The organs that are tired out by working throughout the day, in want of rest, are retracted into a subtle form and they stay in this subtle form during sleep. The praana however continues to operate in order to maintain the body alive. In fact, the prana functions right from inception in the womb until death, relentlessly. For the praana to function incessantly, even during deep sleep, chaitanya or chit-shakti or our aananda swarupa is the cause. This proves that consciousness indeed exists during deep sleep, and its intrinsic nature is pure bliss. It is by this that one is able to recall the experience of deep sleep as ‘sukham aham aswaapsam’ (I slept happily). 

Q: Chaitanya exists in the body right from the fetal state. After death, what happes to it?
A: Nothing can happen to it even after death. The gross body is burnt or discarded after death, and the subtle body i.e the mind, intellect, ahankaara etc. enter a subtle form (called linga sharira). The upanishads say that all 5 elements possess a subtle form (i.e Earth, air, water, fire, space). The subtle body, made up of these subtle elements goes on to another birth and enters another gross body based on past karmas. Its onward journey is governed by good or bad acts committed in previous births. If one has performed excellent acts, he gets a favourable onward journey but if one has troubled many people during his lifespan, the onward journey would be similarly troublesome. Chaitanya however will always remain unaffected. 

Q: If the chaitanya shakti is inbuilt within us, then can we say that human is God?
A: Instead of saying that human= God, we may say that God is WITHIN human. We can indeed say that human is God, provided that the Self is clearly distinguished from the body, mind etc. because God in our upanishads, does not have any form or shape or attribute. Having said so, if one performs excellent deeds following the instructions of God as per the upanishads, then one may call such a person a God-man. However, even in this case, the suffix ‘man’ is still used to refer to him, and we do not refer to him as God directly. 

Further verses from manasollasa:

अहं इत्यनुसन्धात जानामीति न चेत् स्फुरेत्। 
कस्य को वा प्रकाशेत जगत् च स्यात् सुशुप्तवत।। 

(If the thought “I” and knowing as “I know” were not to manifest at all, then the whole world would be inert as indeed sleep as there would be no entity to illumine another. )

Indeed, the knowledge of bliss does not occur as a thought such as “I am sleeping blissfully” even during deep sleep i.e. the thought of “I” and “I know” does not occur. If they do, then one is out of deep sleep. In the absence of the above two thoughts, no entity would be known to anyother entity and therefore the world would be in complete darkness as in deep sleep. 

माययाधिक संमूढो विद्ययेषः प्रकाशते। 
निर्विकल्पानुसन्धाने सम्यक् आत्मा प्रकाशते।। 

When enveloped by maaya one is completely deluded, however when vidya or realization dawns via nirvikalpa anusandhana (i.e. meditation on the nirguna paramaatma), then paramaatma shines perfectly within the mind. The manifestation of paramaatma occurs exclusively via such contemplation and meditation of a nirvikalpa form, and indeed all the versus of Dakshinamurty ashtakam are purely about such nirvikalpa paramaatma. By contemplating on these verses repeatedly along with sincere efforts to meditate on the same, our aananda swarupa will indeed fully shine. 

अविद्याख्य तिरोधान व्यपाये परमेश्वरः। 

Sorrow etc. is due to the ignorance or avidya that veils our aananda swarupa. When this ignorance is removed, then Dakshinamurti or paramaatma dawns as our jnaana swarupa, by his own light i.e. दक्षिनमुर्ति रूपः असौ स्वयमेव प्रकाशते . 




Sloka 5: 
देहं प्राणमपीन्द्रियाण्यपि चलां बुद्धिं च शून्यं विदुः
स्त्रीबालान्धजडोपमास्त्वहमिति भ्रान्ता भृशं वादिनः ।
मायाशक्तिविलासकल्पितमहाव्यामोहसंहारिणे
तस्मै श्रीगुरुमूर्तये नम इदं श्रीदक्षिणामूर्तये ॥५॥

Obeisance to Him, who destroys the mighty delusion, set up by the play of the power of Maaya, because of which people like ignorant women and children, the blind and the stupid, regard the body, the praana, the senses, the fleeting intellect or void as the Self and engage themselves in vain and violent disputations, to that resplendent Dakshinamurty, incarnate in the glorious figure of one’s own Sri Guru. 

In our country, there are known to be several darshanas or supposed means to realization such as the naastika (atheistic), saankhya, yoga, jaina, bouddha darshana etc. each of whom expound their own version of paramaatma. The view of Sri ShankaraBhagawadpaadaacharya is that all these darshanas are within our own mind. Indeed, though we may not be atheistic, many times, atheistic thoughts have overpowered and shaken our intellect (especially during difficult times). Sometimes our intellect behaves as a saankhya vaadin, jaina, or even bouddha. While studying the upanishads, it is important to understand clearly the basis of such waylaid thought, the cause, and the method of returning to the correct path of vedanta. For this, after expounding the chaitanya swarupa in the first four verses, the 5th verse clears doubts about our swarupa which arise from false identifications that are in accordance with other darshanas that oppose the upanishadic principle. This sloka therefore is not about any particular sect of people, but rather about ways of thinking that infect the mind of a true seeker on the path to aananda. 



Q: Varying notions about my aatman as per other darshanas which are not in accordance with the veda that are stated as follows, infect my mind often. Could you please instruct me as to how to counter them? 
One such mindset (that of a chaarvaaka or naastika or atheist) is: what appears in front of us and is available to the senses can be easily accepted to exist. However, that which can not be seen can not be accepted. This is the naastika thought which is heralded by those who do not accept any means of valid knowledge i.e. pramaana other than pratyaksha or direct sense perception. For this reason, even the element aakasha is not accepted by them, and they only accept the other four elements which are available for sense perception. Further, death itself is liberation or moksha, as after death, since the body ceases to exist, all troubles cease as well. For obtaining liberation therefore, one simply needs to ‘wait to die’. 
Indeed such arguments have been present in their own well structured texts and can not be simply dismissed. For a naastika, artha (wealth) and kaama (desire,lust) are the only two purusharthas or purposes for life. As far as chaitanya is concerned, since it is unavailable to the senses like a fruit in the hand, it can not be said to exist. Moreover, one can not attribute any height, weight, color etc. due to which it can not be said to exist, for the reason that all existent entities possess such attributes. The naastika even quotes the veda which says ‘one must live for a 100 years’. If the veda did not consider the body to be the Self, then such statements would be void. 

Another group of naastikas consider that our praana is the Self because of expressions such as “I breathe”, “I move” etc. 

Another group of naastikas i.e. Buddhists or kshanika vaadins consider the buddhi to be the Self due to expressions such as “I see”, “I hear” and “I think”. By such logic, these groups of people claim that separate from the body, senses, prana, and intellect, the Self does not exist. 

A:  The above views can be refuted in the following manner, via sharp vichaara, as vichaara  is the sole means to accept right knowledge. If one indeed accepts that the body is aatman, then dolls or mannequins outside shops too must be considered to be aatman on account of the common property of insentiency. Further, the body is available for perception and is inert and made up of the basic elements (earth etc.). If the body is indeed aatman, then since inertness, perceptibility, composition by elements are common to all worldly objects, every single object must be considered to be aatman. Also we say “my body”, and if the body were to be aatman then one would have to say “me=body” which we do not as we clearly distinguish it to be owned by us. The manasollasa says in this matter 

"मम देहः अयं"  इत्येवं  स्त्री बालः अन्धः च मन्यते,
"देहः अहं " इति नावैति कदाचिदपि कश्चन। 

Next for those who believe that the senses i.e. indriyas are the Self, a counter argument is the following. It is well known that the senses are an instrument i.e. karana for the aatma. Just as objects that are illumined by a light are clearly distinguished from light, the Self which is known by the senses can not be the senses themselves. Since all entities of the world are grasped by the senses, they are a means to identify them and not the entities themselves. Moreover, a blind or deaf person who says “I do not have eyes” and “I do not have ears” surely does not negate his own existence, which clearly proves the distinction between the Self and senses. 

Next, for those who believe that the praana or vital air is the Self due to thoughts such as “I breathe” and “I move”, the counter argument is the following. In deep sleep though prana exists and is functioning to maintain the body, there is no knowledge whatsoever (of the form “I am functioning in the body”). Since the existence of the Self and its state is always known to us, the absence of such thought in deep sleep despite the presence of praana, clearly precludes its Self-hood. 

Next, for those who believe that the buddhi is the Self, a counter argument is that, even when the buddhi and all senses subside in deep sleep, the Self continues to exist (as the impeller of praana). Moreover, the buddhi is kshanika or transient, and is born. However, the Self is known to be eternal and without birth. 

The reason for all the above wrong notions of aatman (that occur in the mind of a seeker) is the moha or delusion that is brought about by the maayaa shakti of paramaatma, which veils our real swarupa. Such moha indeed can only be dispelled by Dakshinamurty i.e. paramaatma himself, who is the jnaana swarupa that destroys the veil of ignorance. Without his special grace, all aforementioned wrong notions or vikalpaas occur and persist despite all efforts by the seeker. Contemplation on Dakshinamurty however is the Raama baana i.e. ultimate weapon against such deluded notions. This is because such contemplation purifies our intellect and enables perfection in all spheres of activity and decision making. 
Indeed in one’s life, one is faced with tough choices. To ensure that one always takes the right decision and is led to success, the purifying grace of Dakshinamurty is essential, and on the other hand, if one’s intellect is impure, then wrong decisions may be taken, leading to certain downfall. 
In fact, in the Shaaradaamba stuti by JagadGuru Sir Sri Chandrashekhara bhaarati mahaswaamiji, what is asked for is शर्मदायिनी कर्ममोचिनि निर्मलं कुरु मानसं  i.e. we pray to Shaaradaamba who is the reliever from karma and bestower of all blessings, to purify our mind. While praying to Goddess Shaaradaamba, one could have asked for knowledge that she personified. However, JagadGuru instructs us to pray for purity of mind. The reason is that once our mind is pure, knowledge in its complete and grand form will manifest by itself, along with all other fruits one may want to pray for. 

Contemplation on Dakshinamurty via these verses is therefore essential for youth who are indeed the favourite strata of society for Sri Shankara Bhagawadpaadaacharya. Youth years are the prime time for such profound contemplation, as the same would be difficult to perform in old age which is frought with sorrow and difficulty. 

The importance of this verse is further explained in the manasollasa as follows. 
देहादिषु "अहं" इत्येवं भ्रमः संसार हेतुकः,
"अन्तः प्रविष्टः शास्ता" इति मोक्षाय उपादिशत् श्रुतिः। 

The wrong notion of “I” in the body etc. is the very cause for samsaara. On the other hand for attaining liberation, the vedas teach us that “the inner controller i.e. our inner consciousness that resides in and controls all beings, is our real Self”. 

The other false darshanas though expounded with profoundly logical arguments, are certainly filled with delusion, and are effectively refuted by Sri ShankaraBhagawadpaadaachaarya. In this regard the manasollasa says “एवं एषा महामाया वादिनामपि मोहिनी” and further

यस्मात् साक्षात्कृते सद्यो लीयते च सदाशिवे  i.e. once one has realized his swarupa and is immersed in aananda, all the afore mentioned delusions will be removed once and for all. 

Finally, the manasollasa concludes by saying

देह इन्द्रिय असु हीनाय मानदूर स्वरुपिण। 
ज्ञानानन्द स्वरूपाय दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः।। 

‘Obeisance to Dakshinamurty whose swarupa is consciousness and bliss, and who is devoid of body, senses, praana, and ahankaara’. 
*************************************************************************************************************

































Sloka 6:

राहुग्रस्तदिवाकरेन्दुसदृशो मायासमाच्छादनात्
सन्मात्रः करणोपसंहरणतो योऽभूत्सुषुप्तः पुमान् ।
प्रागस्वाप्समिति प्रबोधसमये यः प्रत्यभिज्ञायते
तस्मै श्रीगुरुमूर्तये नम इदं श्रीदक्षिणामूर्तये ॥६॥
Obeisance to Him, who, on going to deep sleep by withdrawing all the organs- of cognition, action, as also the internal one- becomes the one Existence enshrouded by maayaa like the sun or moon eclipsed, which experience he recalls when he wakes up, as ‘I have slept hitherto’, to that resplendent Dakshinamurty, incarnate in the glorious figure of one’s own Sri Guru. 

Though the teachings of the upanishads regarding our swarupa have already been expounded in the previous verses, the purpose of the 6th verse is explained according to the manasollasa as follows. It was explained previously that during deep sleep, we merge into our aananda swarupa, and therefore contemplating this state may lead one to realizing swarupa. The doubt that arises however is the following. 

Q: What is there in the state of deep sleep? Indeed all our experience of this state shows that nothing exists in deep sleep. Moreover, in that state, who is known to whom? How do we identify the tattva? After waking indeed we say that we slept peacefully and our face and body reflect the same happiness, however what can we say about the experience during deep sleep? If there is purely void i.e. shoonya in deep sleep, then how can that experience be utilized for realizing the  Self? When providing examples to realize the self, there needs to be some or the other characteristic feature that can be used, however here there seem to be none, and thus this example of deep sleep to convey our aananda swarupa is not of any use. 
Further, what is the proof that chaitanya exists in deep sleep? Though such proof is there after we wake up, none exists in deep sleep.
Further, the world seems to be transitory, that which stays for a few days and then is no more. Therefore it can not be said to be eternal but only transitory i.e. kshanika. Moreover in deep sleep, there are no two entities such as the knower and known, and if any, the entity knows itself. Finally, all the elements such as earth, air, fire, water and our body have come about via paramanus or indivisible atoms, and not paramaatma. 




Such enquiry is essential for those who seek their aananda swarupa because, realization of one’s aananda swarupa is not possible by contemplating on external entities. If that were possible, then we should have already found real aananda by now as we are constantly searching outside for the same. Indeed, our aananda swarupa can be found only if we turn inwards and experience the tattva within.  The upanishads have set out to take us inwards in this manner and establish us in aananda. Sri ShankaraBhagawadpaadaachaarya aims to achieve the same via simple examples in these verses in simple steps, anticipating the doubts of the student. The fact to be proud of in our heritage is this special and simple manner in which the highest upanishadic teachings are expounded in the form of Guru-Shishya samvaada. 


The doubt expressed by the disciple, echoes the opinion of the buddhists which in its own right has been presented in a profoundly rigorous logical framework.  According to them, any entity that exists in the universe must belong to the following five categories or skandhas i.e.
 1. Roopa, 2. Vijnaana, 3. Samjna 4. Samskaara and 5. Vedana. These are explained as follows.

Roopa skandha governs all the objects of cognition and sense organs made up of the elemental entities. Indeed most of the world can be categorized as such.
Vijnaana skandha governs the knowledge of the objects in the universe obtained via senses. 
Samjna skandha governs the ‘names’ that are given to objects, the category of objects i.e jaati , guna or ‘property’  such as color, size etc. that defines a particular category  (such as the category of cows which are distinguished from the category of horses based on certain defining properties such as the lose skin under a cows jaw), kriya i.e. activity or ability to function, vishishta pratyaya or knowledge of parts of a whole either in the body or in the cosmos.
Samskaara skandha govers raaga, devesha i.e. likes and dislikes, punya, paapa i.e. merit and demerit.
Vedana skandha governs the joys and sorrows i.e. various bhaavanaas that we experience, including jnaana parampara udaya i.e. the initiation of the dawn of knowledge.


This school of thought claims that outside of these five skandhas, nothing in the world exists. They question the vedantin as to why on earth an entity that is non perceptible and beyond all these five has to be propounded as the self! 



A: The arguments of the buddhist doctrine such as shoonya (void)  and kshanika (transitory) vaada are refuted and the existence of the Self as a non-void, positive and eternal entity i.e. aananda swarupa, is clearly established, and clearly shown in the state of deep sleep as follows. First, we address the kshanika vaadin- we ask as to how the experience of pratyabhijna in the form of . ‘soyam devadattah’  i.e. identifying an earlier known person Mr. Devatatta as the current person in front of us (as explained in the third verse). We question them as to how such recognition is possible, if indeed everything was transitory. Let's say that you see me now, and five minutes later see me again and recognize me, as one commonly does. If I were to be kshanika, then upon seeing me for the first time, I would perish and it would not be possible for you to recognize me later. In this discourse for example, how would you be able to say that it is the same teacher who is continuing the class? Indeed such recognition of persistent entities is very much in our experience.

Q: This apparent flaw can be resolved in the following manner. Even in the case of recognition or pratyabhijna, the kshanika vaada can still be upheld by considering recognition to be an illusion i.e. pratyabhijna of the form ‘soyam’ is a bhraanti. Such an illusion may be illustrated via an example- consider the flow in a river. As such any flow is nothing but individual droplets of water that sequentially pass by, for example drops of rain that fall sequentially. In the case of a river however we experience the illusion of a ‘constant  river’ or ‘constant flow’ caused by the dense appearance of coalescing water droplets. Though the river that one sees at a particular instant is never the same as the one after an interval, however brief, one still falsely identifies the river to be the same as the one that was seen earlier, and calls it the same ‘flow’. Recognition or pratyabhijna that is spoken of by the vedantin is of the same kind, and for this reason the proof of existence of the Self in deep sleep, via the recognition after awakening in the form ‘I who slept blissfully in deep sleep have awakened now’, can not be accepted by us. 

A: All the above doubts can be clarified via the sixth verse as follows. Consider the example of an eclipse caused by the alignment of the sun and moon. In such a situation, though not visible, one can simply not deny the existence of the sun or the moon in case of the total solar or lunar eclipse. Our ancient scholars knew perfectly as to how to predict eclipses even many decades later, accurately to the resolution of minutes. This would only be possible if the scholars who also taught the upanishads were well versed with scientific principles which allowed such astronomical prediction. Now considering the eclipse, the non visibility of the sun or moon is only due to their obscuration by the shadow cast on them for that brief period of time. Such non visibility therefore can not be proof of non existence of the sun or moon. Similarly, in deep sleep the Self is obscured by maaya and therefore not experienced by us i.e. at that time, we do not know aananda to be our own swarupa, though we are merged in bliss. If it were known, then it would have been surely experienced as such, in the manner of our recollection upon awakening. The reason as to why we do not experience our Self in deep sleep is not due to its non-existence, but obscuration. Further if one needs to enquire as to when and how deep sleep comes about. We may observe that deep sleep occurs once all the senses and mind are retracted and go to a state of rest, i.e. a subtle state. Then, though we do not grasp the entity that existed there, the person who slept surely recollects after awakening that he slept blissfully yesterday. Such recollection would not have been possible if the person who recollects did not exist at the time of deep sleep. For instance, if one were to say that he ate well a few hours ago, it would not be possible if he did not exist a few hours ago and had not eaten food. In the same manner the recollection of the sleep experience would not be possible had there been only void there. Such recollection is indeed pratyabhijna. Prior to sleeping, the experience that “I am going to sleep now” is clearly seen, and after awakening the experience “I slept well” is also clearly seen, and therefore via pratyabhijna the persistent existence of the self must surely be justified. If according to the kshanika vaadin the person had perished just after the instant of deep sleep, then the new person upon awakening, who was absent in earlier instants, would surely not have recalled the experience of deep sleep as his own. Chaitanya therefore definitely existed in deep sleep as evidenced by pratyabhijna. Now for the question as to when the maaya that had cast its shadow of ignorance upon the self can be removed, the answer is that this is only possible by the special grace of Sri Guru, and therefore we take refuge in him i.e. Dakshinamurty- our jnaana swarupa. It is only then that we may clearly recognize the Self and realize our aananda swarupa. 
The upanishad says that though no knowable second entity exists during deep sleep, pure existence i.e. sanmaatra can surely not be denied as void. The recollection  “I slept blissfully” further proves that the Self existed in deep sleep as sanmaatra and its nature was bliss i.e. aananda definitely existed, as in all our experience, even that of the shoonya vaadin. For us to realize the tattva or truth of this experience however, the special grace of Sri Guru is essential, which is obtainable via sincere efforts to meditate on the Dakshinamurty ashtakam. 

In the manasollasa, another argument against the shoonya vaadin is put forth by Sri Sureshwaraachaarya as follows- if one were to say that there was only void, or no existence in deep sleep, then what can be said about the world? Indeed, the world must also then be void, which is against our experience. The reason is that the world emerges again from deep sleep, and what is born from void must also surely be void. However, the buddhist does not accept the world to be void, but only transitory. If indeed only shoonya existed in deep sleep, then even on awakening there must be shoonya only which contradicts our experience as we who awaken are surely not void. 

Another view of the buddhist was that the world emerged merely from the collection of atoms or paramanus, for this the argument provided is- how can the atoms aggregate by themselves? Surely a sentient entity must be postulated in order to explain the aggregation of the atoms in a perfectly orderly way as seen in the universe. It is unreasonable to expect the atoms to randomly aggregate by themselves, while still maintaining perfect cosmic order. When one sincerely enquires about the cosmos, its perfect order is surely grasped. In the Brahmasutra bhaasya of the sutra ‘Janmaadyasya yatah’  this fact is brought out by Sri ShankaraBhagawadpaadaachaarya via the term ‘achintya rachanaa roopa’ i.e. unfathomable form of creation. 
A certain teacher of vedanta once during a discourse said “I ask all in the audience to attempt a challenge- take this jar of coins, and toss each coin one by one. Do it in such a way that they land heads up each time. Are any of you capable of achieving this feat”? After a few minutes of silence by the stunned audience, the teacher said, “If none of you highly qualified students are capable of ensuring order in a simple coin toss experiment too, then how on earth can you fathom that the creation of this magnificent and perfectly ordered cosmos from the atoms is a sudden random accident? Can we call this science at all? Such an argument is surely not logically acceptable. Indeed one must accept a sentient creator”.
Though the mind sometimes is drawn to believing that creation was a random accident absent a sentient creator, upon proper enquiry, one surely is led to the path of the vedas. 

Another argument against the buddhist is- if they indeed believe that everything is void, then what is the purpose of following rites and rituals with rigorous orthodoxy? How can such practice that is enjoined by their own scriptures be ignored while putting forth arguments about the truth of the cosmos?

Further, to those who say that pratyabhijna is said to be an illusion, we ask as to whether they consumed food last night or not. If they accept that they had indeed had their meal last night i.e. recollect past action of eating, then their claim of pratyabhijna being an illusion can certainly not be accepted, as that would lead to the recollection of eating earlier being an illusion i.e. that the meal never took place, and consequently the current experience of fullness of stomach and healthy growth of the body can not be explained. Indeed, in each moment of our lives pratyabhijna is indispensable. At the time of deep sleep, everyone's experience, even that of a naastika is the same, and the bliss experienced is also the same. 

Sri ShankaraBhagawadpaadaachaarya out of his compassion says that the naastikas are not to be completely denounced as baseless as their arguments indeed are based on the fact that the aatma swarupa has completely pervaded all that is in the cosmos, including the body. In this sense their argument about the body being the Self can be explained. If they indeed enquire further, they will surely be led to the truth. In fact, the taittiriya upanishad says ‘asanneva sa bhavat’ i.e. that those who believe that paramaatma or aananda or chaitanya do not exist, will go into non-existence as he is denying his very Self. On the other hand, one who accepts this Self is to be regarded as a learned scholar. 


























Sloka 7:
बाल्यादिष्वपि जाग्रदादिषु तथा सर्वास्ववस्थास्वपि
व्यावृत्तास्वनुवर्तमानमहमित्यन्तः स्फुरन्तं सदा ।
स्वात्मानं प्रकटीकरोति भजतां यो मुद्रयाभद्रया
तस्मै श्रीगुरुमूर्तये नम इदं श्रीदक्षिणामूर्तये ॥७॥
Obeisance to Him, who, by means of the blessed symbol (jnaana mudra) reveals to His devotees His own Self which forever shines within as the ‘I’, unchanging through all the stages of life such as childhood etc., and in all the states of experience such as waking etc., and generally in all changing conditions, to that resplendent Dakshinamurty, incarnate in the glorious figure of one’s own Sri Guru. 

In the previous verse, the existence of the self in deep sleep was established via pratyabhijna. In the present verse, the method of contemplation to bring about such pratyabhijna leading to direct realization of one’s aananda swarupa is taught. Further the extent to which pratyabhijna plays an essential role and is part of every instant of our life is also brought out in this verse.

Q: Can an absolutely non-refutable reason be provided as to why one should accept pratyabhijna, and can the thought process leading to such pratyabhijna be explained?

A: This will be explained in terms of two examples. There are many who do not accept God, however they also can simply not deny the existence of their own Self. The question now is, what is this undeniable Self? In us, there are two instances of ‘Self’ that we experience. One is the self that undergoes various changes and variations across one's life i.e. the self that was the young child changes to the self that was a teenager and changes further to the self is now an adult. Even though every aspect of our adult self is different from the self that was a child i.e. the cells of the body have changed and the body has grown, the mind has also grown, the senses have also ripened, the intellect has also drastically changed, and yet we say “I who was a child” or “my childhood” i.e we experience a sense of continuity of the self. This itself is pratyabhijna. Every aspect of the body and mind have changed (vyaavrttaasu) however, the undercurrent of the Self as “I” remains constant in the changing self. Secondly, one may examine the states of waking, dream and deep sleep. In the waking state, all of us strive via several efforts. During dreams, all these actions cease but the impressions of the actions generate the dream world experiences. On awakening we say “I who was in the dream”,  though our body, senses etc. that were operating during the waking state are absent in the dream state. Next, in deep sleep even the mind that was operating during the states of waking and dreams is absent. Nonetheless we still recollect on awakening “I slept blissfully in deep sleep”. This shows that in all three states or avasthaas  though all the conditions change, the “I” or Self remains the same. This is verily pratyabhijna. This ‘Self’ which is the object of recollection is realized by us in a very auspicious and blissful manner as the inner flashing/realization of the constant undercurrent that is referred to as “I” i.e. our aananda swarupa is experienced with utmost clarity. This is symbolized by the auspicious jnaana mudra of Dakshinamurty, which also offers ultimate protection to the disciple. Via such a mudra, Sri Guru awakens us with absolute clarity as “I am there with you, I am indeed your aananda swarupa”, in the context of deep sleep (i.e. on contemplating it). Such realization is indeed Guru murti. If one takes refuge in such Dakshninamurty, then indeed via pratyabhijna the direct realization and vishesha sparsha i.e ‘special contact’ of our aanada swarupa i.e. its clear experience is possible, and not just theoretical understanding. Further, such clear experience of our complete aananda swarupa is possible in the state of waking too, not just in deep sleep. 
In this manner pratyabhijna is clearly explained in the verse, along with declaring the Jnaana/aananda swarupa of Dakshinamurty. This is the “I” which is the persistent undercurrent across states and stages of life, and is nothing but pure consciousness. 

In manasollasa, pratyabhijna is technnically defined as follows. 
भातस्य कस्यचित् पूर्वं भासमानस्य साम्प्रतम्। 
सोऽहं इत्यनुसन्धानं प्रत्यभिज्ञानं उच्यते।। 

Earlier, a certain knowledge had arisen about an entity. Then, at present time, when the same knowledge/experience arises, the recognition that the past experience is the same as the present one, is what is called pratyabhijna. This is generally applicable to all recognitions. 

Now, how can we apply pratyabhijna to realize that paramaatma or aananda swarupa is indeed the Self? The reason is that there is an apparent difference between our limited nature and the all powerful paramaatma. In this case, how can pratyabhijna be applied to realize that the two are the same? This is essential to understand in the context of the Dakshinamurty ashtaka, and is also essential to shape the character of the seeker. 
Sri Sureshwaraacharya explains the method of pratyabhijna as follows. In the two instances of pratyabhijna, the time, space and form that qualify both instances must be dropped. Then, what comes to our experience is verily chaitanya or pure consciousness. 

For example, in the first instance of the self i.e. Jivaatma, the space and time delimitation and the qualifying adjuncts such as the body, senses, praana and mind need to be dropped off. Here, to ‘drop off’ only means to clearly discriminate the Self from the falsely imposed adjuncts, and drop off the bhaavana that they are the Self, and clearly grasp the idea that they are not the Self . The reasoning that may be used is that the Self is constant and eternal, whereas all the adjuncts are temporary. Next as regards to paramaatma, when the adjuncts that are superimposed on him via the world such as the act of creation, sustenance etc. need to be dropped off. Then paramaatma will remain in his pure form of sat-chit-aananda, and further this pure form of paramaatma will be clearly recognized as the very form of the Self which remains when its adjuncts are removed. The manasollasa describes this via the verses

तत् देश कालाकारदीन अवधूय आनुशन्गिकान। 
यथैकं वस्त्वनुस्यूतं प्रत्यभिज्ञानं आत्मनः।। 
मायानुशङ्ग संजात किञ्चिद्ज्ञत्वाद्यपोहनात्। 
सर्वज्ञात्वादि विज्ञानं प्रत्यभिज्ञानं आत्मनः।। 
Upon dropping off all limiting adjuncts of the Self via viveka or discrimination, certainly chaitanya alone will remain, and that will be realized as non different from paramaatma. Indeed, there can not exist two distinct chaitanyas, nor can there exist two distinct aananda’s. Even though the objects of worldly bliss such as a laadoo or jilebi or sugarcane juice may be different, bliss in itself can not be different at all. Due to the different means of obtaining bliss via different objects, it seems as though bliss is manifold, in reality however bliss is indeed one. Thus the opinion of jnaanis is that via pratyabhijna, a seeker must realize his aanada swarupa.  
Another fact that regarding the persistence of the Self even beyond this body as accepted by all mahaatmaas including Sri ShankaraBhagawadpaadaachaarya and Sri Sureshwaraachaarya is the following. 

पूर्वजन्मानुभूतार्थ स्मरणात् मृगशावकः। 
जननी स्तन्यपानाय स्वयमेव प्रवर्तते।। 

तस्मात् निश्चीयते स्थायीत्यात्मा देहान्तरेष्वपी।
स्मृतिं विना न घटते स्तन्यपानं शिशोर्यथा।। 



 Consider a cow shed in which several cows are tied, wherein one cow has just given birth to a calf. Here one notices that the just born calf exclusively approaches its own mother for obtaining milk. How is this possible? Even when trained it is difficult to ensure this! The only reasonable explanation is that the impressions or samskaaras of performing the act of obtaining milk from one's own mother must have been acquired by the same being over several past lives. Indeed, without a valid reason, one can not accept any theory as scientific! This shows indeed that the self persists across lifetimes, and is indeed the eternally constant undercurrent. 

The manasollasa further says
ईषत् प्रकाशः अभूदीशः मायायवनिकावृतः । 
सम्यगावरणापाये सहस्राम्शुरिवस्फुरेत्।। 

This sloka must indeed be kept in mind by all of us. The meaning is, since the chaitanya swarupa is obscured by the veil of maaya, it is only partially visible to us. However, once the veil is lifted the Self shines in all its glory just as the clouds that veil the sun when removed allows the sun to shine in all its glory. 

An important aspect regarding the application of this verse in our daily life is as follows. In our villages there is a popular belief that one must contemplate for a few minutes before sleeping and a few minutes after waking as ‘how is it that I am going to sleep now?’ ‘how is it that I awakened now’. Most of us are under the impression that it is WE indeed who go to sleep. This is absolutely wrong. Indeed all that we are capable of doing is resting the body on the mat. However, we do not know HOW to go to sleep, as that is what happens automatically. On several occasions we may try in various ways to fall asleep such as rolling to the side etc., however in vain. Indeed if it was us who went to sleep, then such sleep should be achievable at will, which is certainly not the case. Further, we are not ourselves capable of waking from sleep as per our wishes as well. On several occasions though one sets an alarm for a particular time, one is unable to wake up, and on the contrary one sometimes wakes up much before the intended time. Indeed, such careful analysis of the waking, dream and deep sleep state is an essential and effective tool to realize our aananda swarupa. 





































Sloka 8: 
विश्वं पश्यति कार्यकारणतया स्वस्वामिसम्बन्धतः
शिष्याचार्यतया तथैव पितृपुत्राद्यात्मना भेदतः ।
स्वप्ने जाग्रति वा य एष पुरुषो मायापरिभ्रामितः
तस्मै श्रीगुरुमूर्तये नम इदं श्रीदक्षिणामूर्तये ॥८॥
Obeisance to Him, the Supreme Self (Being), who deluded (in reality not deluded) by Maayaa sees in dream or in waking, the universe consisting of distinct entities variously related such as cause and effect, servant and master, disciple and preceptor, father and son and so on, to that resplendent Dakshinamurty, incarnate in the glorious figure of one’s own Sri Guru. 

This verse may be considered to be a summary of the previous seven verses. In the first verse we started off by establishing that the apparent world i.e. vishwam does not exist outside consciousness i.e. the existence is borrowed. However, a question that arises here is,

Q: Several aspects of our life are prescribed by the vedas such as the duty of a disciple towards his Guru, or that of a son towards his father etc. If indeed as per the vedas, consciousness is the only reality and all other entities are illusory, then one would  have to rule out the existence of the Guru as separate from the self as well. Further, there would be no value attached to his teachings as they too would fail to be established as truly existent. The student too will have to be falsified, as the only existent entity is consciousness or prakaasha. Who is in bondage then? For whom is libeartion? If rprakaasha is the only entity, then how can the framework of our lives be justified? Who is to answer all this? 

A: In our lives we experience several relations such as a servant-master, cause-effect, student-teacher, son-father etc. All of these relations and distinctions do indeed exist in waking and dream states. However, the reason for this is going to be explained. Indeed we do not rule out your world experience at all. We simply attribute its appearence to the effect of maayaa shakti, as illustrated by the examples of the magician, yogi etc. For this reason the relations mentioned indeed appear, though they do not exist from the standpoint of ultimate reality i.e. they are not paaramaarthica as they do not exist if one clearly contemplates about their tattva. However from the standpoint of vyavahaara or transactional reality, they may be accepted. The reason is that in vyavahaara, the ignorance or ajnaana has not yet been removed. For this reason we accept such duality though not really existent. 
Some examples of such illusion is, a hole in space, or a doll that is considered as a person. On several occasions such dolls are used when teaching about our anatomy as “this is the hand, this is the leg” etc. though the doll really does not possess a hand or leg. In a similar manner, one may still transact using notions of duality which may be accepted due to maayaa shakti. The true substratum for all such transactional reality however is aatman or chaitanya itself. 
Further, the manasollasa explains the relations in duality as follows. Consider a person who is a student of a Guru and who himself is served by several of his students. From the standpoint of his Guru he is called a student, and from the standpoint of his students he is a Guru. When being called a student or Guru, no aspect of his self changed at all. Similarly, a person may be a son to his father and a father to his son. In either case, there is no change brought about in him due to the different ways that he is addressed in. In transactional reality it is thus seen that the same object may be regarded as many different entities from the standpoint of different qualifying adjuncts. Similarly, the one true reality i.e. chaitanya is considered in the world via various forms or objects in the world. Indeed there is no harm in doing so as all that exists in the world, including names and forms are nothing but chaitanya. The realization of this truth however is only possible by jnaana graced by Sri Guru, just as one realizes the truth of dreams only on awakening. 

Q:If all that is in the world is due to maayaa, then would not the upanishadic teachings themselves lose value? For instance, water seen in a mirage can not serve any real purpose. Therefore the vedas and upanishads can not serve any real purposes such as realizing aananda or paramaatma. 

A: Even in our daily lives, it is seen that real purposes can be served by an unreal entity. For instance, one assumes a certain deity to exist in a stone image. Though not really existing in it, when the stone is worshipped with such firm faith, real effects such as fructification of desires are seen. Another example is one may utilize the illusory appearance of himself in the mirror in order to dress up his real body. Therefore, for the only reason that all entities are due to maayaa, the upanishads do not lose their real purpose. 
Another example is that of a rope and snake in dim light. When this example is contemplated on carefully, even though the snake does not really exist, it appears. Further even the appearing snake disappears when we shine light. Here, what was non-existent appeared, and what appeared disappeared. This world is of a similar nature indeed. 

Q: Since all that is in the world is illusory, do the effects of good and bad deeds performed by us, stick to our Self?

A: The Self, or chaitanya or paramaatma is certainly beyond such effects. They stick only to the mind and not to consciousness. Just as the sun which illumines both good and bad objects is unaffected by the properties of the illumined objects, consciousness is unaffected by the entities of the world. Another example is that the sun, when covered by dark clouds or smoke, is totally unaffected by the darkness or blackness or dirt.

Q: How does one cross the realm of duality and realize our pure chaitanya swarupa?
A: The manasollasa says

योगाभ्यास वशाद्येन मनो निर्विषयं कृतं। 
निवृत्तः स पुमान् सद्यो जीवन्मुक्तो भविष्यति।। 

Via the practice of yoga, if one purifies the mind i.e. renders it free of spanda or thoughts, then such a yogi would be established in his aananda swarupa even when alive. 

Sloka 9: 
भूरम्भांस्यनलोऽनिलोऽम्बरमहर्नाथो हिमांशु पुमान्
इत्याभाति चराचरात्मकमिदं यस्यैव मूर्त्यष्टकम्
नान्यत् किञ्चन विद्यते विमृशतां यस्मात्परस्माद्विभोः
तस्मै श्रीगुरुमूर्तये नम इदं श्रीदक्षिणामूर्तये ॥९॥
Obeisance to Him, whose eight-fold form alone is the earth, water, fire, air, ether, Sun, Moon and the Jiva, in which manner this-the moving and the unmoving-appears, beyond whom, supreme and All-pervading, nothing else exists for the discerning, to that resplendent Dakshinamurty, incarnate in the glorious figure of one’s own Guru. 

Q: How can we dispel maaya using the entities of this world?
A: In the ninth verse, the five elements, sun moon and jivaatmas are utilized for upaasaana or meditation with form, in order to dispel maaya. Indeed through the nirguna dhyana as prescribed in the previous eight verses surely can dispel maaya, however not all are capable of such subtle contemplation. This verse is for those of us who prefer a more gross method of meditation. 
What is the meaning of upaasana? The yoga shastra and upanishads say that upasaana is performed by continuously contemplating on an object of meditation as prescribed in the vedas, via an uninterrupted stream of similar thoughts. For example the pranava ‘AUM’ or the form of Sri Raama may be objects of upaasana if one focuses ones thoughts about the pranava or form of Raama with uninterrupted focus. The form prescribed in this verse is extremely convenient for upaasanaa. The reason that is mentioned in the manasollaasa is

प्रत्यक्षेणोपलभ्यन्ते सर्वैरप्यष्टमूर्तयः। 
अनुमेयासु न मनः क्षिप्रं आरोहतीत्यतः।। 
The eight forms of dakshinamurty are easily available for direct perception for anybody. On the other hand, it is difficult to establish the mind in the more subtle aspect of dakshinamurty i.e. pure aananda which are only to be inferred or deduced, and not available to direct perception, as described in the preceding verses. 
Though aananda is our own swarupa, we are unable to grasp it as it is not an entity that exists apart from us. Therefore, our sense organs are unable to grasp our real Self. In this regard, an effective method to grasp the Self is as is repeatedly pointed out by the upanishads, is to negate all that is not Self by the thought  neti-neti i.e. ‘not this-not this’. 
When the cosmos is partitioned, one obtains these eight forms, and indeed anything that exists in the world is composed of these eight forms only. In this method, the upaasana prescribed is to contemplate on these eight forms as paramaatma himself. For instance, one may choose only the sun, or the moon or water or any of these forms of one’s liking, and contemplate with firm conviction that that particular element itself is paramaatma.

Q: How does one bring about such conviction that these eight forms are paramaatma?
A: All these eight forms are effects i.e. they are born out of a primary cause like a tree born from a seed. The cause is indeed chaitanya. This cause indeed inheres in every effect. For instance, any instrument that is created from silver having its own specific name and form such as a necklace, or ring or bangle is essentially silver itself. Similarly, each of these eight effects of paramaatma, though known by different names and possessing different forms, are essentially paramaatma. For instance ‘earth’ has its own special name and property and is dealt with in its own unique way, however its essential nature is of its cause, i.e. chaitanya or paramaatma. In our shaashtras, the tattva of paramaatma i.e. Shiva tattva is 36-fold (refer manasollasa). Out of these, those that are directly visible are the eight that are described in this verse. Therefore these eight are prescribed for upaasana in order to overcome maaya. 

Q: What is the method of upaasana?
A: The method of contemplation is that, the element that is present in our body (pindaanda)  is the same that is present everywhere in the cosmos (brahmaanda), and what is there in the cosmos is the same that is in our body. For instance, in our body we find skin, flesh, blood etc. Each of these may be mapped to one of the elements for instance flesh to earth, blood to water, heat in the body to fire, and the space that exists within the body to ether. Indeed space exists in our body due to which food may be ingested and movement of substance may occur within the body. Other than these five elements, indeed chetana or consciousness is also present. Similarly in the whole cosmos along with the five elements, there exists the superior consciousness or Iswara who maintains the whole cosmos. The method for contemplation is to start with the elements within the body, and recognize them as effects of paramaatma only i.e. as chaitanya, and further contemplate that this is the same chaitanya that governs the cosmos as well. Conversely, the chaitanya that governs the cosmos and all the elements in it, is the same that is maintaining our body and the elements within. Next, using viveka or discrimination, all aspects that are different from paramaatma need to be separated. Then samadhi or being established in aananda is possible. The salient feature of such contemplation is to identify the individual i.e. vyashti with the collective i.e. samashti (or hiranyagarbha). On performing such vyashti-samashti contemplation, it is possible to establish oneself in aananda and overcome all worldly sorrow. 
Another aspect that is discussed in manasollasa as regards how to contemplate on the cosmos within us is, consider the rivers and sea. These may be regarded as the naadis or channels of praana within our body. The sun and moon may be regarded as our eyes. Blood as water in the rivers etc. (refer manasollasa). After identifying the local body with the cosmic/collective organism and subsequently discarding the insentient aspects, it is possible to be established in pure consciousness. 









Sloka 10: 
सर्वात्मत्वमिति स्फुटीकृतमिदं यस्मादमुष्मिन् स्तवे
तेनास्य श्रवणात्तदर्थमननाद्ध्यानाच्च संकीर्तनात् ।
सर्वात्मत्वमहाविभूतिसहितं स्यादीश्वरत्वं स्वतः
सिद्ध्येत्तत्पुनरष्टधा परिणतं चैश्वर्यमव्याहतम् ॥१०॥
As in this hymn, has been clearly brought out the universality of the Self, (that thou art the All-Self) so, by listening to, reflecting and meditating on, and devoutly reciting it, the state of being Iswara attended by the mighty grandeur of universal Self-hood results of its own accord as also that unimpeded Divine Power in its eight fold aspect. 

In this verse, the phala or fruit of contemplation as well as the instructions regarding the means to contemplate has been expounded. The summary of this verse is that aatman is indeed one, and this aatman or Self has pervaded all that exists. In all entities, chaitanya is one and the same. This is termed sarvaatmatva. This bhavana has been clearly expounded in the verses of Dakshinamurty ashtakam. These verses therefore must be listened to, contemplated on by carefully considering all aspects that were taught and firmly establishing the concepts taught using logic, and subsequently meditating on the verses, or alternatively, reciting the verses with firm faith. By doing so, the experience that chaitanya alone exists everywhere is achieved. Beyond obtaining such an experience there exists no greater achievement indeed. Moreover, one who has had such an experience verily ‘becomes’ Iswara i.e. all of the cosmos including the fourteen worlds would fall within the grasp of such a sadhaka, and will be under his control. Further, the eight yogic siddhis will be within his grasp and his wealth or sampat would never diminish. 

The manasollasa says
परिच्छिनं अहंभावं परित्यज्यानुषङ्गिकम्। 
पूर्ण अहंभाव लाभोस्य स्तोत्रस्य फलं उच्च्यते।। 

The limited feeling of “I” “I” “I” in this deplorably limited body, that is the basis for all our sorrow must be firmly discarded using our intellect and the feeling of the real Self or chaitanya in its full cosmic scope must be contemplated on, and the direct realization of the same is the fruit of this contemplation. 

Q: Does this contemplation or do these verses have any worldly fruits as well?
A: In this regard, the manasollasa says
पुत्र पौत्र गृह क्षेत्र धन धान्य समृद्धय। 
अर्वाचीनास्च सिध्यन्ति स्वर्ग पाताल भूमिषु।। 
For those who practice sincerely these verses, all our family, lineage, wealth etc. would prosper. Further all fourteen worlds starting from paataala to svarga would fall within our grasp. 

Q: How is such phala possible from nirguna anusandhana whose primary purpose is liberation?
A: Indeed yes. For example, if one lights a fire for the primary purpose of cooking, light and heat in the room are auxiliary effects by which cold and darkness may be overcome though not intended primarily, as the verse in manasollasa says:

पाके प्रवर्तमानस्य शीतादि परिहारवत्। 
प्रसन्गिकाः च सिध्यन्ति स्तोत्रेणानेन सर्वदा।।  

Indeed if this Dakshinamurty ashtakam is practiced while firmly establishing oneself in sarvaatma bhaava, all other effects and siddhis are automatically gained. Indeed all fruits are obtainable. For instance as an academic one would be able to excel in learning and retaining knowledge and teaching others. 

पुष्पमानयता गन्धो विनेच्छां अनुभूयते। 
पूर्ण अहंभाव युक्तेन परिच्छिनाः विभूतयः।। 

Another example given is, if a person were to carry a fragrant flower along a path, then though not intended, the fragrance would reach all persons who are along that path. Similarly if one practices the verses with sarvaatma bhaava, all other inferior siddhis and worldly gains materialize along with sarvaatma bhaava i.e. the experience that the Self is all. 

Q: What are the eight siddhis?
A:  They are as follows
 Anima siddhi is the ability to become extremely tiny like a bacteria
 Mahima siddhi is the ability to become extremely large and expansive
 Garima siddhi is the ability to increase one’s weight by an astronomically large extent
 Laghima siddhi is the ability to levitate or fly, such as the power of Hanuman to fly even without wings. Indeed in order to complete his task of discovering Sita Devi and punishing the asuras, all eight siddhis were used in appropriate situations, and finally Hanuman succeeded in his task and submitted his successful results to his Guru Sri Raama. An example of Hanuman using anima and mahima siddhi is when he was encountered by a giantess demon. The demon tried to swallow Hanuman, for which he increased his size via mahima siddhi. Then suddenly, Hanuman became infinitesimally  small and entered her stomach through her mouth, upon which he instantly increased his size beyond measure due to which she exploded. In this manner, Hanuman utilized his powers to complete his task. Jambavanta who knew the true ability of Hanuman, instructed him to complete the herculean task of fighting the asuras in Lanka and discovering Sita Devi. Indeed one can guarantee that if one practices Dakshinamurty saamarthya with sincerity in the manner prescribed, the siddhis will materialize.
 Praapti siddhi is the ability to see a person who is situated in a far off world such as in paatala or brahma loka even without any external instrument, only by the power of the mind. 
Praakaamya siddhi is the ability to transport oneself to any location via flying in the sky etc. 
Ishitva siddhi is the ability to create, preserve and destroy a whole world
Vashitva siddhi is the ability to exercise control even over the deities who control the world such as yama. 

Though on the surface it may appear that such siddhis are far fetched, they are justified indeed as these siddhis are TRIVIAL as compared to the real intended result i.e. sarvaatma bhaava. When the latter is achieved, the trivial siddhis are automatically guaranteed as the verse in manasollasa explains.

Q: What is the significance of the refrain in the Dakshinamurty ashtakam, i.e. ‘tasmai Sri Guru moortaye nama idam Sri Dakshinaamurtaye’?
A: This is repeated to indicate the fact that all results that are achievable by worshipping various Gods and deities, are easily achievable by worshipping our Sri Guru with sincere devotion, as says the popular vedic quote: 

यस्य देवे परा भक्तिः यथा देवे तथा गुरौ। 
तस्यैते कथिथाः हि अर्थाः प्रकाशन्ते महात्मनः।। 

Having said so, the worship of our Sri Guru swarupa i.e. the contemplation on Dakshinamurty indeed can achieve any result in the cosmos. 

Q: Can we expect tractable effects within our body by practicing these verses?


(Fig. Fire=Chaitanya>Pot=buddhi>Water=manas,prana>vegetables=body)
A: Yes. Consider the following example where a pot of boiling vegetables is placed over fire for cooking the vegetables. Here, the effect of fire is first absorbed by the pot, and subsequently by the water and finally by the the vegetables. Just as the heat from fire is easily absorbable by the pot since it is a good conductor of heat, the shakti of Chaitanya is easily absorbed in our buddhi via the unique and excellent methods of nirguna anusandhana as expounded in the verses. This shakti once absorbed in the buddhi, is transferred to the mind and prana that house the buddhi, and through them to the physically body as well, just as the heat from the fire once absorbed by the pot, is transferred to the water and subsequently the vegetables. 

The anusandhana in the verses therefore can produce effects that can be utilized by anyone to excel in their profession and overcome all sorrow. Moreover since the effect of such anusandhana is easily absorbed by the buddhi and sequentially transferred to the physical body as well, one can ensure that diseases and bodily defects too can be cured and peace and tranquility can be achieved at both the mental and physical level. 



Q: Are there real life examples wherein the Dakshinamurty ashtakam was practiced and worldly benefit was gained?
A: Mere recitation of the verses with faith too has indeed served to be highly beneficial to several persons in facing difficult situations, overcoming troubling thoughts of the past and taking on unsurpassable future challenges as well, detailed as follows.
Facing difficult challenges: The first incident was of a young student in Mysore who was impelled by his father to study a certain profession which he was very afraid to pursue. In order to pursue that profession, he had to pass an extremely difficult exam which he was sure that he would fail. He therefore approached an astrologer to help him out of this difficult situation and guide him regarding future course of action. The astrologer, to his surprise, recommended only one single sloka to pursue with focussed devotion, and that happened to be the Sri Dakshinamurty Ashtakam! The student with utmost faith pursued the stotra by merely reciting it, even without any detailed contemplation. After doing so, to his utmost pleasant surprise, the student secured the FIRST RANK in the extremely difficult exam that we was sure to fail. Later on he went on to become one of the most successful practitioners of that profession in his city.
Overcoming stress and fear: This example is of my own (i.e Sri Guru’s demonstration of the power of the Ashtakam). We, along with the members of our monastery, were camping at Japadakatte a few years ago before the residential buildings were constructed. We were camping for a couple of weeks in tents in the wild. Close to that place there was a crematorium and several wild animals including snakes. In the dead of the night in the solitary tent that I was camping in, I heard a disturbing noise that woke me from sleep several times. I attributed that noise to a possible wild animal close by or some other creature. After a while, that entity started to bite and gnaw on my body and disturb my sleep. When I investigated, I discovered that these were a group of wild rats that were biting my body despite the blankets that were used. For several hours I tried various methods to safeguard myself from them such as wearing more blankets, putting on the lamp etc., however to no avail. Then I realized that I was foolish to waste my time on such worldly methods, and decided to apply the power of Sri Dakshinamurty ashtakam. Hence, I decided to seriously contemplate on the fact that the consciousness that is in the rat is the same that is in me, and hence I need not fear the rats at all. After just a few minutes of such contemplation via this sarva aatma bhaava, the rats went away and no longer troubled me. By this, we can understand that the contemplation of sarvaatma bhaava can definitely rescue us from situations wherein stress or trouble is caused by other beings in our life. 
Facing calamities calmly: In a certain monastery, there was an incident wherein a few members expired due to a fire related accident. Immediately after, several members of the press flooded the monastery and the head of the monastery i.e. His Holiness was faced with a very heavy burden of being responsible for the death of the monastery members. At that time, when interacting with his Holiness, it was noticed that His Countenance was absolutely unperturbed and the conversations that were held was as though it was a normal day, and there was a special form of calmness. The incident was also dealt with, with proper methods without losing calm at all, and the monastery was ultimately able to overcome the aftermath of the incident. In that monastery, the practice was that the Sri Dakshinamurty Ashtakam was practiced on a daily basis with prostrations for each sloka physically. His Holiness too believes that it was this simple practice that enabled such calm bravery and strength. 

From these examples  which are just few out of many, we can understand that even mere recitation, prostration or simple contemplation on the Dakshinamurty ashtakam can yield profound results in personal, professional and spiritual realms, which can not be achieved by any other means as well. For this reason, I urge that you not only practice this ashtakam but also share its knowledge and benefit with friends and acquaintances as well.

Questions by audience:
Q: Can the upasana procedure regarding the 8 elements be summarized once more?
A: Here there are two steps
First, one needs to contemplate on the brahmaanda (cosmos) and pindaanda (body) aspects of the 8 elements, as detailed in the 9th verse discussion. 
Second, one needs to contemplate on the chetana or consciousness aspect in the brahmaanda and pindaanda. Here the special contemplation is that the consciousness that is in the cosmos is the same that is in the body and vice versa. Further, the elements that are in the body are the exact same that are in the cosmos. Then, the appearing brahmaanda and pindaanda are mere appearances, and what truly exists is one universal and homogenous consciousness. This is the sarva aatma bhaava. 

Q: I was very happy to learn about the advaita chintana in these verses, especially in the fourth verse. There is the question I have though, of whether the dualistic school of thought i.e. dvaita is compatible with this ashtakam, and whether it has any role in the practice of this ashtakam as well.
A: There is no doubt that dualistic thought indeed is given a place in our framework of contemplation. The speciality of advaita is that, from the standpoint of ultimate reality one adheres to advaita, however, from the standpoint of vyavahaara or transactional reality, one adheres to dvaita. The upanishads are very clear about this. For example, in front of me there is a microphone. However, if we disintegrate this mic as a substance into molecules and then further on into atoms and nucleons etc., it no longer is considered as a microphone by a scientist, and it is nothing but the substratum that contains the cosmos. On the other hand, for transacting in the world, we still consider it as a microphone and use it
Another aspect is of the eight-fold meditation in the ninth verse. This is certainly duality! Duality therefore, and dualistic way of thought is not only acceptable in the framework of this Ashtakam, but also considered as highly necessary in early stages of meditation and practice. 

Q: One question I have is, I find it easy to accept that consciousness or chaitanya is indeed present in me, by using the logic given in the fourth verse (i.e. that my organs and mind can not function without this internal consciousness that is distinct from them and impells them). However, I find it extremely difficult to accept that aananda is my swarupa, given that in the world I find that there is mostly pain and sorrow, including my own state of mind at many times. Moreover, I sometimes wonder whether such unblemished bliss or aanada swarupa can even exist!

A: Chaitanya can only be one and Aananda can only be one as well, existence too can only be one, and chit or knowledge also can be one only. The upanishads further say ‘आनन्दाद् हि एव खलु इमानि भूतानि जायन्ते ‘ meaning that all beings and elements emerged from bliss only. One can question here however as to how this is possible as wherever we see there is mostly sorrow. However, here we must understand that this is due to our standpoint of ignorance, due to which sorrows are appearing. Nonetheless these sorrows are indeed mere appearances. When we obtain the Grace of Sri Guru via sincere contemplation on the vedantic thought, we will indeed realize that our swarupa is sat-chit-aananda i.e. pure existence-consciousness-bliss. 




Dakshinamurthy Chintanam

How is dakshinamurthy chintanam helpful to youth?

Tattaitareeya Upanishads speaks of panchakosha - five sheathes - 
Anna maya (food sheath)
Pranamaya (vital sheath)
Manomaya (mental sheath)
Vignanamaya (intellectual sheath)
Anandamaya (bliss sheath)
The Upanishad asked the seeker to do upasana ( spiritual practice of intense focus, meditation,etc) of each of these sheaths. To help the sadhaka (spiritual seeker) to do upasana, the Upanishad describes each sheath individually. Each sheath is depicted by head, right wing, left wing, base etc..
For example in manomaya kosha, the yajurveda is described as the head [Tasya yajur eva shiraha]. Meaning the head of Mano kosha is said to be meditated upon as having Yajurveda as its head. But, if we think
‘how at all this Yajurveda is to be thought of as head, there is no rhyme or reason?’. The answer is found in the bhashya (thesis) of Sri Adi Shankara bhagavat padaacharya, written for this particular mantra. Acharya says [yajuriti aniyataakshara padavasano mantra visheshaha]. Many mantras have a set of rules in terms of the syllables' usage called chandas. Mantras of Rigveda are all confined to the rules of chandas. In the case of Yajurveda it is not so. The  collection of mantras which do not follow the rules of chandas is termed Yajurveda. 
While performing the yagna (fire sacrifices) or yaaga [dravya tyaga , giving up the ownership on substances like rice, ghee, cloth, etc and offering them, through fire to the chosen deity], the Yajur mantra are the ones mainly used during the offering of the aahuti (oblations).  right when the aahuti is being offered Yajur mantras are chanted. Rigveda is used to do the stotra of each of  the deities to be invoked, By the stotra the deity is eulogised. Samaveda is used to invoke the deity. Then the deity is said the appear and take the offerings made. Since yajur mantras are the ones directly used during the exact time of offering, they  are considered to be the most nearest of all the vedas during yaga. So to show the importance of this Yajurveda, it is denoted as the head of Manomaya kosha. Because the head is the important organ of animals,  keeping this similarity, the Upanishad says that Yajurveda is the head of Manomaya kosha.

For any mantra to be chanted or any kind of sound to be uttered, the sthana, prayatna, naada, varna, pada, vakyaika vishaya, the vrutti (thought = action of mind) which has sankalpa are all needed along with mouth of the person who says and ears for the person who listens. All these are required for any sound. These are discussed in detail in vyakarana shastra. All the vedas mantras (Rig, Yajur and Sama) also have these. 
 So in conclusion [manovrititve mantranam] mantras are mental thoughts, Mano vrutties.
If we can bring up the same thoughts again and again , this is called the manasa japa. For example, if we start to repeat a name, like coconut, coconut, coconut,.. then the object of coconut will not enter the mind, instead the thought of the object named coconut is repeated in the mind. Similarly, when we repeat a mantra, the syllables do not go into the mind, but the thought of the syllables will repeat in the mind. This is manasa japa. It's not any object. This type of aavruthi (repetition) is prescribed in shastras. Shastra says the different phalas (benifits or fruits)  for each mantra and importance is also given to the count also.

25 - 29 

Here a counter question may come up. Instead of saying that the thought of the object is repeated during japa, can we say that we get back the memory of the object each time we chant or utter the name of the object?  This will not work in case of a mantra. Shastras ordain the aavruthi of mantra, not the object of the mantra . Hence the repeated thought is what is called as aavruthi or japa. Vedas are eternal [Nithya]. Only if we say that repeating  mantras (doing aavruti)  is repeated thoughts of mantra , then only will the statement ‘Veda are eternal’ will hold good, is what Sri  Acharayapada says.

Now, coming to context of doing parayana (chanting) or anusandhana (contemplation with meanings), specially in the context of Dakshinamurthy stotra, the shabhas, padas, vakyas which in the stotra are to be repeated. That means, while chanting the stotra, the Dakshinamurthy astakam,  the manovrutti will be in the astakam. This is where all can reap the benefits. Mind is takes in all the sensory inputs of sound, touch, form, taste and smell [shabda, sparsha, roopa, rasa, gandha], from the respective sense organs. According to shastras, the mind takes up the form of the input and hence it is recognised. While chanting and doing anusandhana of Dakshinamurthy astakam, the mind again and again takes up the form of the stotra. In other words, the mind becomes Dakshinamurthy astakam. Dakshinamurthy astakam speaks about the eternal chaitanya, jnana swaroopa in each of its shlokas. Also, each shlokas brings more and more clarity to the eternal truth. As the sadhaka chants and does anusandhana of this astakam, his mind attains the swaroopa, the eternal bliss, in fact the sadhaka becomes , he identifies his own true nature of bliss dismissing all the wrong notions about himself. He dismissed himself as doer or enjoyer or the limited one . He embraces, recognises himself as the unlimited  fountain head of all the Ananda.   What else is more beneficial than this ?! Therefore Dakshinamurthy astakam is very important of all the storas. Infact such stotras, like Dakshinamurthy  are rear ones which directly, clearly, precisely, crisply lead  from sorrow to bliss, Ajnana to jnana. Because Dakshinamurthy himself is bliss, jnana and chaitanya swaroopa.

But some of us who have been chanting this stotram for a while may say that we haven't had any such experience! The answer is.. In his ‘vrutis’, a commentary on Patanjali  bhagavan’s yoga Sutra, Sri Sri sadashiva Brahmendra pada says, with on Sun lord coming up in the horizon, the whole world lits up. Scriptures say, that the Lord has effulgents of thousands of sun rising together, then how come our ignorance [ajnana] is not removed?. Scriptures can never be wrong. So we can only infer that our ignorance is so thick and strong ! Our ignorance is so strong that even the lord with effulgence thousands of suns, goes unnoticed by us. Hence repetition [aavruthi] is recommended.

When Dakshinamurthy ashtakam anusandhana begins the intellect , or the Anthah karana (combo of mind , intellect, memory and false ego) starts to purify. We will be equipped with a powerful tool, which is sharpener and can make right decisions. This is termed viveka. Hence all our misunderstandings and problems due to that are erased. Once the intellect begins to purify, its purity is spread all across the body. This is definite, because we know that body is 
completely controlled by intellect. The mind also becomes clear, firm, capable and strong. Hence , thought the chanting brings out initial changes in intellect, eventually it helps the mind and body also heal and purify. 
 This is the exact reason why scientists at NIMHANS found that chanting improves the strength of neurons. This leads to overall quality improvement in the individual. Hence Dakshinamurthy astakam not only purifies intellect, mind but also body. 
But we see many sadakas around who despite chanting the  stotras are suffering?!. The answer is, sadhakas at higher levels know that the body is not eternal. His focus is to use the tool of manas buddi (intellect and mind) to get rid of this samsara (continuous chain of births and deaths). The body given now by Ishwara will work as designed by him to exhaust prarabda karma. Thinking so they don't spend the valuable time and acquire viveka to solve world problems. So, as said by Sringeri Acharya,Sri Vrudda Narasimha Bharathi ji, if sadhaks get illness in body, he can definitely get rid of stotras, as he very well knows, that the ailment is only for the body and not for him! Achary has displayed this in his own life. Achary was continuously troubled by fever. But he had to perform all the ordained rituals [anusthanas]. For that bath was the precursor. During 104deg fever, bathing would not be possible. So If he would get fever at the time of pooja or rituals, he would transfer it to a wooden stick. The stick would be trembling and shivering. After finishing bath and rituals, Acharya would take back the fever.. upon seeing this, disciplines would ask Acharya, with such powers why did not he get cured of the fever instead of giving and taking it back from the stick. Acharya said “that can be done, but I resist wantedly, because this body is destined to get fever. If I don't exhaust this karma, I might have to come back to exhaust this in another birth!” By this episode of the jnani, it's more than sure, the stotra,  mantras japa,when done in the right manner,  can give us tremendous power helping us to achieve whatever we want. This goes without saying that Dakshinamurthy astakam also has this infinite energy.

Seeker’s question: Does the aavruthi of mantra or stotra be done with knowing the meanings?
Answer : Aavruthi can be done by knowing the meanings or without.

Seeker's question: if already a sadhaka is into the upasana of one deity, how can or should he inculcate Dakshinamurthy  astakam?
Answer: there is no room for such confusions. Seekers may pick any of such stotra, mantra or even bhashya vakyas of Sri Adi Shankara bhagavat padaacharya and do anusandhana. As already said, Dakshinamurthy  astakam is crisp, clear, direct and precise. And since the context is about Dakshinamurthy , it's preferred here. Swamiji cites one of his personal experiences.  His Guru Vidwan Krishna Jois used to tell him this example. While the Guru was teaching vedantha to a householder [gruhastha], the disciple’s wife walked into the teaching area. Both Guru and discipline were puzzled. After bowing down to the Guru , she said she had come to thank the Guru. She said, upon attending the vedantha class and listening to you, the Guru, her husband, who once had a very bad temper, was now very calm and composed. His bad temper had vanished in one year! All through the year, the teacher had been teaching the bhashya of Sri Shankara bhagavat padaacharya’s commentary on Brahma Sutras. Listening to bhashya had brought this tremendous change in the discipline. Infact Guru had not known about his disciple's temper. Also Guru attributes the mental strength acquired by his disciple to the listening [shravana] of the scripture. 
In conclusion, many stotras, mantras , bhashya vakyas have this tremendous power. Especially in the case of Dakshinamurthy stotram, it is said to bestow ishwarya (all kinds of prosperity), longevity, knowledge and finally the vedantic secret of oneness.
[Yastha  prasannaa  manu santha  dhano, Moorthim mudhaa  muktha  sasanka mouli,
Iyswaryaayurlabathe   cha  vidhyamanthe  cha  ,Vedantha  maha   rahasyam.]

In Dakshinamurthy astakam, the hymn says that the sadhaka will first attain sarvaraatmatva bhava (oneness) along with all the 8 siddies. This shows that the sadhaka who is into the sadhana of Dakshinamurthy astakam will be bestowed with vedantic knowledge, bliss right away along with all other worldly wishes. Hence, it's a very important stotra for an ardent , enthusiastic and serious spiritual seeker. As compared to other stotras, which take seekers in a longer route giving the fruits also slowly. But in case of Dakshinamurthy astakam, it is a direct path to the advaitic knowledge.

Ajnana or avidya is directly removed by the Dakshinamurthy astakam, since it's a direct prayer to the swaroopa or brahman.
All negatives like desires, anger, lust, jealousy, hatred, envy, etc, accumulated over an infinite number of past births are all washed away at once!
 Dakshinamurthy astakam talks about the Parpoorna vastu (the complete thing, meaning , once this is obtained there will be nothing more to be obtained, once this is known nothing else needs to be known.). 
In each verse, Tasmai shri Guru murthaye nama idam Sri Dakshinamurthaye, is chanted indicating  prostrations to the venerable Guru Dakshinamurthy. Namaha indicates oneness of the Jeevatma and Paramatma. Dakshinamurthy  is not a deity outside us, but is the same Paramatma in all of us.Hence,  Aavruthi of this Dakshinamurthy astakam removes all differences and helps us recognise the single chaitanya vastu in all beings including oneself. This is sarvatam bhava. Especially in the fourth stanza [nana chidra ghatodhara…] once we recognise our own nature of bliss, unlimitedness, completeness is thoroughly understood, there is no reason to be dull and sad. The tool - body mind complex can be used effectively to do anything and everything making our as well as others  life blissful .
  
Kathopanisd 1.3.12 says
Eṣa sarveṣu bhūteṣu gūḍho'tmā na prakāśate;
dṛśyate tvagryayā buddhyā sūkṣmayā sūkṣmadarśibhiḥ. 

"This Self, hidden in all beings, does not shine forth; but It is seen by subtle seers through their one-pointed and subtle intellects." 
Commenting on this mantra in his bhashya, Sri Sri Acharayapada says, before this mantra Yama , the Guru, says to the discipline Nachiketa, that, a brave , intelligent person who understands about the self and will never undergo sorrow again. In this mantra Gur says, the self being in all beings, is hidden and does not shine forth. This seems contradictory.
But it is not so. Yama , the Guru opines so…for an unpolished intellect [asamskrutha buddi] having negatives, though the very self is shining in each and every moment, it goes unnoticed. But for a purified  mind and razor sharp (ex. sharp blade of grass) intellect, who has one pointed focus or concentration, such a Anthah karana which has become so sublime, it would be able to grasp the truth. In this context, Dakshinamurthy astakam Aavruthi helps us purify the intellect and mind. Helping us further to discover our own blissful nature.

Bhagavat Gita 3.42, reiterates..
indriyāṇi parāṇy āhur indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ
manasas tu parā buddhir yo buddheḥ paratas tu saḥ
The  sense organs are superior to dull matter; the mind is higher (higher meanings subtle and pervading) than the senses . Because the mind can do sankalpa and vikalpa. ; Intellect is still higher than the mind, since it can make decisions; and the truth or self is even higher than the intellect., because the self is not an object at all. It's always the subject. In fact the self is the one which provides chaitanya and jnana to all the objects including the intellect. Because of avidya, Ajnana about our own blissful nature, we feel limited, hence we desire for other objects to get bliss. Once the intellect is pure and sharp the true nature of self shines forth from within. Dakshinamurthy astakam is the go to stotra for immediate intellect sharpening, because the very deity prayed here is the self!

Just because we are into this sadhana of Dakshinamurthy, we are assured of getting the desired worldly objects and getting rid of unwanted objects. Yogis and ardent sadhakas won't stop for this, depending on the intensity of the sadhana, the yogis obtain tremendous power, siddies. But they don't care about it. At the max, they might use the power as indicators of the milestones achieved in the way of sadhana . They give up desires for worldly objects and proceed to know the Purna vastu, after knowing which nothing else would remain to be known, after getting which nothing needs to be obtained. That Purna vastu is the self, the aananda 

It is to be noted that, for a commoner like us the milestone of sadhana could be the temper control, less intensities of desire or anger, being more calm and composed..

In conclusion, as per our wish and intensity of sadhana (Sravana, artha manana, dhanya or sankeerthana), Dakshinamurthy astakam can give us worldly pleasures and  or the knowledge of self itself. These are the benefits of Dakshinamurthy astakam.